Table of Contents
Executive summary ....................................................................................................................................... 2
1.
Introduction .......................................................................................................................................... 4
2.
Background ........................................................................................................................................... 4
2.1.
Epidemiology of LF ........................................................................................................................ 4
2.2.
Advances in diagnosis and treatment ........................................................................................... 5
2.3. The Global Programme to Eliminate Lymphatic Filariasis ............................................................ 5
2.4.
Global LF situation ........................................................................................................................ 7
2.5.
LF situation in South-east Asia region ........................................................................................... 7
2.6.
LF situation in India ....................................................................................................................... 8
3.
Accelerated plan to eliminate LF ........................................................................................................ 11
3.1
Goal ............................................................................................................................................. 11
3.2.
General objectives ...................................................................................................................... 11
3.3.
Specific objectives ....................................................................................................................... 11
3.3.1. Action 1: To enhance advocacy and ownership of the programme at all levels .................... 12
3.3.2.
Action 2: To implement confirmatory mapping in uncertain areas........................................ 12
3.3.3.
Action 3: To strengthen communication and social mobilization .......................................... 13
3.3.4.
Action 4: Ensure enhanced MDA in all districts ...................................................................... 15
3.3.5.
Action 5: To introduce innovative preventive chemotherapy strategies and strengthen
supplementary measures ....................................................................................................................... 17
3.3.6.
Action 6: To strengthen monitoring and surveillance system ................................................ 18
3.3.7. Action 7: To identify all people affected with chronic disease to facilitate treatment .......... 19
3.3.8. Action 8: To strengthen the health system capacity to provide quality care for people
affected with chronic disease ................................................................................................................. 19
3.3.9. Action 9: To ensure quality data management at all levels ..................................................... 20
3.3.10. Action 10. To build stronger and sustainable partnerships ..................................................... 20
3.3.11. Action 11: To support operational research ............................................................................ 20
3.3.12. Action 12: Preparation of dossier for validation of elimination of LF ...................................... 21
References .............................................................................................................................................. 22
Glossary .................................................................................................................................................. 24

Executive summary

Lymphatic filariasis (LF) is a serious public health problem in India. The disease is prevalent in
rural and urban areas of 256 districts of 16 states and 5 union territories. Lymphatic filariasis
is more prevalent among urban poor and affects all segments of rural population. The
infection starts in childhood and accumulates through adulthood, resulting in irreversible
chronic disease conditions such as lymphedema, elephantiasis and hydrocele. The disease
inflicts stigma, mental suffering, social deprivation and economic loss and is a major cause of
poverty in the affected communities.
The National Filaria Control Programme (1955-2000) operated only in few selected towns
and cities and met with limited success. The Global programme to eliminate lymphatic
filariasis, launched in 2000, provided a great opportunity to India and several other affected
countries to effectively combat the disease. It envisages elimination of the disease through a
two-pillar strategy (i) preventive chemotherapy in the form of annual mass drug
administration (MDA) to interrupt transmission of the disease (ii) morbidity management
and disability prevention measures to alleviate suffering among people affected with chronic
disease condition.
India initiated steps to eliminate LF in 1996-1997, when a pilot project was launched in 7
districts. A National programme to eliminate lymphatic filariasis was launched in the year
2004 and annual single dose mass drug administration programme was introduced in 202 of
the 256 endemic districts. By 2007, the MDA programme was further scaled up to cover all
256 districts. During the last two decades, the national programme made good progress. Of
the 256 endemic districts, MDA was completed and transmission interruption accomplished
in 94 districts. Another group of 25 districts is being validated for interruption of
transmission. However, there are also a lot of concerns and challenges about the
programme. A group of 137 districts continue to have transmission despite implementing >56 rounds of MDA. The implementation of the programme is ineffective, as evident from their
failure to meet the transmission interruption criteria even after prolonged MDA, in many
districts of larger and high burden states such as UP and Bihar, which are also with several
highly endemic foci.
Starting from 2018, the national programme plans to implement an accelerated plan to give
a new impetus to the ongoing activities and achieve the goal of LF elimination by 2020, in
accordance with the World Health Organization (WHO) regional strategic frame work for
control/elimination of Neglected Tropical Diseases (NTDs) and WHO NTD goals and timeline.
The plan is built upon the national guidelines for elimination of LF (2009) and seeks to
introduce newer intervention strategies and improve implementation of MDA and
Monitoring& Evaluation and surveillance strategies. The plan envisages (i) constitution of a
high level inter-ministerial committee to monitor the progress of the programme

(ii) strengthening of advocacy and social mobilization (iii) confirmatory mapping of uncertain
areas using mini-Transmission Assessment Survey (iv) improved advocacy, social
mobilization, training and supervision in all programme activities (v) implementation of
enhanced MDA with emphasis on micro-planning and directly observed treatment,
supported by adequate human and financial resources and supplementary intervention
measures (v) introduction of newer initiatives in districts with persistent transmission and/or
poor implementation of MDA (vi) strengthening of monitoring and evaluation and
surveillance system (vii) robust assessment of chronic disease burden (viii) development and
implementation of plans for delivery of minimum package of care for all chronic disease
patients (ix) improved data collection and data reporting and consolidation of data and data
management using integrated NTD database. The accelerated plan aims to improve the
effectiveness of MDA, interrupt transmission in all LF endemic districts, increase access to
recommended minimum package of care in all areas with known patients by 2020.

1. Introduction

Lymphatic filariasis (LF) is a mosquito borne infectious disease caused by nematode parasites of
the order Filariiidea. LF in man is caused by three species of filarial parasites – Wuchereria
bancrofti, Brugia malayi and Brugia timori. Several species of Culex, Anopheles, Aedes and
Mansonia mosquitoes are involved in transmission of LF. The disease is prevalent in 73 tropical
and sub-tropical countries in South-east Asia, Africa, Mediterranean, South Pacific and South
America regions.

LF is a disfiguring and debilitating disease and was ranked as second leading cause of disability
globally. The disease is a cause of stigma, shame, psychological problems and social and
economic deprivation. The affected individuals and families suffer from consequences of
chronic and acute disease conditions and loss of work and employment opportunities and
treatment costs. It was estimated that the annual economic loss due to LF in India was close to
US $ 1.0 billion.

LF is wide spread in India and 21 states and union territories are endemic for the disease. Highly
endemic foci are present in several states, particularly Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Orissa, Jharkhand
and Andhra Pradesh. The disease is prevalent in rural and urban areas. A National Filaria
Control Programme (NFCP) was launched in 1955, but its outreach was limited due to
operational problems and resource constraints. Population growth combined with lack of
control operations in rural and many urban areas lead to tremendous increase in endemic
population size and number of infected people. However, the NFCP launched in 2004 a National
programme to eliminate LF, following starting of the Global programme to eliminate LF(GPELF)
in 2000. The programme is based on a mass preventive chemotherapy strategy and morbidity
management plan recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO). The programme
made good progress in many states and contributed to reduction of the disease burden. It,
however, remained less effective and transmission continues to occur in a number of districts in
several states. More effective strategies are required to interrupt transmission in all endemic
districts and achieve elimination of LF by the target date of 2020. Hence, an accelerated plan to
eliminate LF will be launched in 2018. The details of the plan are presented in this document.

2. Background

2.1. Epidemiology of LF

LF is a mosquito transmitted infectious disease caused by thread like nematode worms of the
order Filariidae. The adult filarial worms live in lymphatic system of man. The life span of adult
worms is 6-7 years and each female worm produces millions of microfilariae (Mf)during its
reproductive life span of 4-5 years. The Mf appear in the peripheral blood during nigh time

(nocturnally periodic form) and are ingested by mosquitoes along with blood meal. Within the
mosquito, the Mf undergo development through L1 and L2 stage and become L3 or infective
stage larvae in 10-12 days. The L3 are transmitted from mosquito to man during blood feeding
and they move to lymphatic vessels and undergo development to become adult worms over
2.0-21/2 year time. Such repeated infective bites result in patent infection in humans. The
immune mediated inflammatory reaction of lymphatic walls to presence of adult worms
precipitates acute clinical disease, which gradually progress into chronic disease conditions such
as lymphoedema and hydrocele. Secondary bacterial infection causes acute ADL attacks and
aggravates chronic disease condition, leading to development of elephantiasis. LF infection can
be diagnosed by testing blood for Mf or immunological methods such as antigen or antibody
detection. Transmission of LF can be interrupted by killing Mf and adult worms through
treatment or efficient control of vector mosquitoes through various methods including personal
protection measures. Attempts to control filariasis in the past, through chemotherapeutic
measures and/or vector control met with limited success due to low commitment, scaling up
challenges, operational issues and poor implementation.

2.2. Advances in diagnosis and treatment

Intensive research resulted in development of new treatment regimens, sensitive diagnostic
methods and morbidity management measures. Single dose of DEC was found to reduce
microfilaraemia dramatically and maintain the reduction for one year. Based on this, the annual
mass drug administration (MDA) strategy was developed, which is feasible and can be
effectively implemented across the endemic areas. Very sensitive antigen based diagnostic
methods were refined and standardized and made available commercially, which eased the
operational challenge of night blood sampling for infection assessment. Subsequently, antibody
based diagnostic methods were also developed. Until recently, BinaxNOW Filariasis was the
only immune-chromatographic test commercially available against Bancroftian filariasis
infection. A new point-of-care rapid diagnostic test -Filariasis Test Strip (FTS) - is designed to
detect in human blood the antigen (Ag) of W. bancrofti, globally the predominant parasite. The
FTS has been evaluated in different countries and is now being used in mapping, monitoring
and evaluation activities (WHO, 2017). A new combination of drugs is shown to be highly
effective against LF infection in comparison to the current recommended regimen. WHO has
recently recommended use of triple drug therapy in certain situations, which is likely to
expedite elimination of LF (WHO, 2017).

2.3. The Global Programme to Eliminate Lymphatic Filariasis

The WHO launched the GPELF in the year 2000. The strategy of GPELF consists of two pillars: (i)
to stop the spread of infection (interrupting transmission); and (ii) to alleviate the suffering
among people affected with chronic disease (preventing and controlling morbidity) (Figure 1).
The recommended strategy to interrupt transmission of LF is annual single dose mass drug
administration (MDA) in all districts and areas endemic for LF. The drugs used in MDA
programme are a combination of DEC (6 mg/kg body weight) + ALB (400 mg) in endemic areas

free from onchocerciasis prevalence. The strategy recommended to alleviate suffering in
chronic disease affected people is Morbidity management and disability prevention (MMDP)
through self-care among lymphoedema patients that principally includes limb hygiene
measures and surgical intervention for hydrocele.

Five to 6 rounds of annual MDA are required to interrupt transmission of LF. Each round of
MDA should be ‘effective’ i.e. at least 65% treatment coverage should be accomplished. After
MDA, the evidence for interruption of transmission is generated through implementation of the
first transmission assessment survey (TAS 1) among children of 6-7 year age in each district. If
the number of infected children found in TAS 1 is less than the threshold number (which is
approximately 2% Ag or Ab prevalence), then the MDA is stopped. After stopping the MDA,
post-MDA surveillance is initiated. This consists of two more rounds of TAS (TAS 2 and TAS 3).
Simultaneously, the chronic disease burden should be estimated in all endemic districts, plans
for delivery of care to chronic patients developed and each chronic patient provided minimum
package of care. The evidence for providing care is generated through inspection of health
centres and assessment of the quality of care provided. When all districts in a country complete
TAS 3 successfully and minimum package of care is delivered to all patients with chronic
disease, the country is deemed to have eliminated LF. Then the country prepares LF elimination
dossier for validation of elimination of LF(Figure 1). An expert group constituted by WHO
reviews the dossier and gives recommendation on country’s claim of elimination of LF.

Figure 1. Different constituents and steps of LF elimination programme

2.4. Global LF situation

Globally, LF is the most commonly prevalent and high burden Neglected tropical disease (NTD).
LF had been endemic in 73countries, 1.1 billion population was at risk of infection and an
estimated 129.82 million people were infected as on 1994 (WHO, 1994). The disease is widely
distributed in South-east Asia, Africa, South Pacific region, Eastern Mediterranean and South
America. In several countries, LF was a major public health problem and one of the leading
causes of disability. Control of the disease is constrained by low priority, poor resources and
unfeasible control options. Very few countries attempted and succeeded in control of the
disease. However, the GPELF raised new hopes to contain the disease, as its strategies are
feasible and affordable. Encouraged by this, several countries launched the national
programme to eliminate LF (NPELF). Fourteen of 73 endemic countries started the programme
in 2001, the first year of the GPELF operations, with a targeted population of 3.2 million. The
programme made steady progress over the years. By 2016, the programme was in place in 55
countries, 975 million of 1,463 million population was included in MDA programme. Twenty
countries completed MDA and their population no longer require treatment, 30 countries have
implemented at least one round of MDA in all IUs and 16 countries implemented MDA in a
proportion of IUs. Since 2000, a cumulative total of 6.5 billion treatments were delivered to
>850 million population (WHO, 2017). As on 2017, 9 countries have been validated as having
eliminated LF as a public health problem. MDA programme implemented during the initial 13
years, had cured or prevented 96 million cases of LF (Ramaiah and Ottesen, 2014). Thus, the
GPELF has been making a steady progress and many countries are expected to achieve the goal
of LF elimination in the coming years.

2.5. LF situation in South-east Asia region

LF is endemic in 9 countries including India in South-east Asia region (SEAR). It is the largest
endemic region and accounted for 54% of the global burden of LF prior to launching the GPELF.
Overall, 909 million of the 1,463 million population (62%) ever required PCT for elimination of
LF live in the region. However, the region made impressive progress since the inception of the
GPELF. By 2017, three countries – Maldives, Sri Lanka and Thailand – have successfully
completed MDA and post-MDA surveillance and eliminated LF as a public health problem.
Bangladesh has met the criteria to stop MDA in all endemic districts and is now in post-MDA
surveillance phase. As on 2016, Myanmar has implemented MDA in all 36 districts, where it is
required and Timor-Leste continue to implement MDA in all 13 endemic districts. Nepal
completed and stopped MDA in nearly 50% of the districts and has been implementing MDA in
the other districts. Indonesia is yet to scale up MDA to cover all endemic districts, but steps are
being taken to achieve 100% geographic coverage (WHO, 2017). The details of the programme
in India are given in the next section. As a result of impressive performance of the programme,
the share of the SEAR in the global population requiring MDA declined from 63% in the year
2000 to 52% in 2016 (WHO, 2017) and the share in the global burden of disease declined to
32% in 2013, from 54% in 2000 (Ramaiah and Ottesen 2014). Nevertheless, concerted action in

the coming years is required to eliminate LF in the region due to large endemic population,
fragile health systems in some areas and a number of logistic and operational challenges.

2.6. LF situation in India

LF had been widely prevalent and is a serious public health problem in India. According to the
estimates made in 1994, India alone accounts for 43% of the global infected population (WHO,
1994). W. bancrofti is the predominant parasite, prevalent in all endemic states and
transmitted by Cx. quinquefasciatusexcept (in Andaman and Nicobar alone, the vector is Ae.
niveus. B. malayi is also prevalent in the country, but only in the state of Kerala, and is
transmitted by Mansonia species. Nationally, 98% of the infections are due to infection with W.
bancrofti.There are several highly endemic foci spread across the country. LF inflicts
tremendous social and economic burden on the affected communities in the form of loss of
work, employment and educational opportunities and treatment costs and stigma and
psychological problems. The disease was estimated to inflict an annual loss of about US $ 1.0
billion in India. The NFCP, established in 1955 to combat the disease, yielded only limited
results. Its strategy – detection and treatment of Mf carriers and vector control – could be
implemented only in limited number of urban areas and a vast majority of endemic population
in rural areas could not be covered by the programme, due to lack of infrastructure and low
priority for the disease.

LF is prevalent in 256 districts in 21 states and union territories (UTs) and, as on 2017,630
million population live in the endemic districts. The strategy of GPELF – MDA and MMDP –
provided a good opportunity to implement LF control measures in the entire country and
eliminate the disease, as it is very cost-effective and eases several logistic constraints,
associated with earlier control options such as ‘test and treat’ and vector control. For the first
time, MDA programme provided an opportunity to the MoH to cover the entire population of
endemic district with intervention measures and control and eliminate the disease in a time
frame.

A pilot project to eliminate LF, using annual single dose MDA (DEC alone), was started in in
1996-1997 in 13 districts of 7 states. This enabled the national programme to understand the
logistics and operational aspects of the programme. The project was extended to 31 districts in
2002 and DEC+ALB combination therapy was implemented in some of the districts. In 2004, the
national programme was launched, covering 202 districts in 20 states UTs. The programme had
envisaged the target date of 2015 to eliminate LF. Subsequently, the programme was further
scaled up to include all 256 districts and treat the entire population of endemic districts. Since
2007, the programme has been implementing DEC+ALB combination therapy in all districts.
During the last 12 years, the programme achieved good progress in some states.

As on 2016, under the national programme, a total of 4.28 billion of treatments were consumed
by 630 million target population in the endemic districts. As on 2017, of the 256 endemic
districts (=intervention units (IUs)), 100 (39%) completed and stopped MDA, on the basis of TAS
1 results (some IUs include >1 EU). Another group of 25 IUs (10%) are to implement TAS 1 and

may possibly stop MDA soon (Figure 2). And, 133 districts (52%) would continue to implement
MDA. Forty four of 133 districts failed TAS 1, which means transmission continues to occur
above threshold level even after 5-6 rounds of MDA.

Though the programme made significant progress and covers the entire endemic population,
there exist several concerns and challenges, which require resolution in the coming years. The
programme should be revamped and implemented in a mission mode to reach the goal of LF
elimination by 2020. Also, the programme needs to be strengthened to improve its overall
performance and quality, with focus on the following:

 Strengthening advocacy at national, state and district level
 Develop and implement new social mobilization and communication strategies
 Develop and implement new capacity building packages
 To determine the endemicity status of uncertain areas
 Enhanced MDA using micro-planning and with directly observed treatment and
strengthened supervision to achieve maximum compliance and treatment coverage,
supported by tools such as Supervisor’s coverage tool and coverage surveys
 Introduction and operationalization of new intervention tools such as IDA therapy to
expedite the programme outcomes
 Streamlining of M & E activities per recommended guidelines and introduce new
diagnostic tools
 Robust assessment of chronic disease burden and providing minimum package of care
to people affected with chronic disease in all endemic districts
 To establish good data management systems and consolidate the available data
 To promote supplementary intervention measures such as vector control and DEC
medicated salt
 Revisit the LF situation and reprioritize the areas for MDA in urban settings
 Develop a strategy to provide MDA for migrant and nomadic population

RAJASTHAN
ORISSA
GUJARAT
MAHARASHTRA
MADHYA PRADESH
BIHAR
KARNATAKA
UTTAR PRADESH
JAMMU & KASHMIR
ASSAM
TAMIL NADU
TELANGANA
CHHATTISGARH
ANDHRA PRADESH
PUNJAB
JHARKHAND
WEST BENGAL
ARUNACHAL PR.
HARYANA
KERALA
UTTARAKHAND
HIMACHAL PRADESH
MANIPUR
MIZORAM
MEGHALAYA
NAGALAND
TRIPURA
SIKKIM
GOA
A&N ISLANDS
D&N HAVELI
PONDICHERRY
LAKSHADWEEP
N
E
W
S
MDA Conducted
TAS Cleared
TAS Proposed

Figure 2. Status of MDA programme and TAS in India (2017)

3. Accelerated plan to eliminate LF

In view of the global target date of 2020, prevalence of infection above threshold level in many
districts and several challenges faced by the programme, an accelerated plan to eliminate LF in
the country is felt necessary. The details of the accelerated plan are discussed below. Achieving
elimination will require improved diagnostic tools, vector control methods, integration of
WASH interventions, and treatment and symptom management. Important learnings from
previous efforts need to be summarized and applied to this new effort to improve the quality of
the LF control program. Such areas include inter-sectoral coordination, sensitization of key
stakeholders/partners/champions before MDA rounds, and collaboration of technical partners.
APELF provides an opportunity to build upon learnings from the LF elimination guidelines issued
in 2009, to focus on key program areas that require reinforcement as well as introduce new
innovative approaches to comprehensibly target elimination efforts.

3.1 Goal

Elimination of lymphatic filariasis (LF) as a public health problem by 2020, as envisaged by
WHO-SEAR’s strategic framework.

3.2. General objectives

 To accelerate interruption of transmission in all endemic districts using enhanced and
innovative preventive chemotherapy strategies
 To provide a minimum package of care to all people affected with chronic disease to
alleviate suffering
 To augment the programme activities towards preparation of LF elimination validation
dossier

3.3. Specific objectives

-To strengthen advocacy and ownership of the program at all levels
-To implement confirmatory mapping of uncertain areas
-To strengthen communication and social mobilization
-To ensure enhanced MDA in all endemic districts
-To introduce new and innovative preventive chemotherapy strategies and strengthen
supplementary intervention measures
-To strengthen monitoring and surveillance system
-To assess burden of chronic disease
-To strengthen the health system capacity to provide quality care for people affected with
chronic disease
-To ensure quality data management at all levels

-To address the gender equity and disability related issues (no one should be left behind as
per the theme of SDGs)
-To build stronger and sustainable partnerships
-To support operational research
-To initiate steps for preparation of dossier for validation of elimination of LF

3.3.1. Action 1: To enhance advocacy and ownership of the programme at all
levels

The guidelines of the national programme (2009) had laid down structures such as Task Force
and Steering Committees at state and district level to guide the programme implementation.
Enhanced advocacy under APELF will target all potential stakeholders including government,
technical institutes, and partners to engage in each step of program planning and
implementation. Support and commitment at the highest level is required to strengthen
commitment of all stakeholders to accelerate efforts towards elimination. Creation of new
platforms to strengthen inter-ministerial coordination and explore linkages with other health
programs and key influencers to scale effort in mission mode at different levels needs to be
conceived.

3.3.2. Action 2: To implement confirmatory mapping in uncertain areas

Historically, 256 districts in 21 states and UTs were endemic for LF. Using these data, all the 256
districts are included in MDA programme and targeted for elimination of LF. It is suspected that
low levels of LF may be prevalent in a few other districts in some states. It is also possible that
some areas of the non-endemic districts bordering the endemic districts may also be endemic
for LF. Hence, confirmatory mapping of the districts and areas suspected to be endemic for LF
will be undertaken to ensure that no population with LF prevalence is left untreated. Such
confirmation of LF status of the districts is essential, also from the perspective of preparation of
the dossier for validation of LF elimination.

A new and robust method – mini-TAS – will be used in confirmatory mapping of the hitherto
uncertain areas. Mini-TAS envisages testing of children of 9-13 years in schools (4th to 8th grade
students) for Ag prevalence in uncertain districts (Gas, 2017). Ag prevalence among children is
assessed using FTS. If the Ag prevalence among children is above the threshold level, the district
will be declared endemic and included for MDA. If the prevalence is below threshold level, the
district will be declared non-endemic.

A list of uncertain districts/areas will be prepared for each state jointly by the state and
national programme and reviewed by an expert group. Mini-TAS will be conducted in districts
and areas recommended by the group and endemicity status determined. Best practices will be
adopted and followed in conducting mini-TAS. Separate and dedicated teams will be formed
and trained in each state to conduct mini-TAS. It will be conducted in close collaboration with
the departments of primary school education and secondary school education in each state.

Guidelines on the conduct of mini-TAS and data collection formats will be provided to all state
programmes.

3.3.3. Action 3: To strengthen communication and social mobilization

The Accelerated Plan for Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis (APELF) 2018 will require a detailed
communication and social mobilization plan to spread messages about the disease, symptoms,
transmission, and benefits of MDA. The role of communication lies in awareness generation,
community engagement and mobilization efforts, which are crucial for achieving high
compliance and coverage. All endemic states will need to adopt the revised communication
strategy as part of their efforts to eliminate LF by 2020.
Communication and Social Mobilization Strategy
The communication and social mobilization strategy will include plans for community
engagement, building an enabling environment across the board (from national to village level)
and capacity-building for drug administrators with a focus on interpersonal communication.

Community engagement will be ensured by engaging panchayat raj institutions, religious
leaders, social and community groups, women’s groups, self-help groups, NGOs, communitybased organizations (CBOs), and other networks of influencers in dialogue to inform, answer
questions, clear misconceptions and build trust in the program. Schools and colleges will also be
engaged in creating a conducive environment for LF elimination.

It has been well-established that treatment compliance is largely dependent on clear
communication by drug administrators, which makes capacity-building of drug administrators
indispensable. Administrators should be well-equipped to handle queries as well as resistance
when communicating to their target audience about the disease, symptoms, adverse effects,
drug dosage and exclusion criteria. Drug administrators should also be capacitated on morbidity
management so that linkages can be ensured and all LF cases have access to required health
services.

Social mobilization:
Social mobilization is essential to create awareness about and demand for MDA and, in select
districts, about innovative strategies like IDA and use of fortified salt. It also includes promoting
awareness about sanitation practices for water management to curb breeding of mosquitoes as
well as improved personal hygiene through use of soap and water in lymphedema
management. Key opportunities such as Village Health Nutrition Day, gram sabha meetings,
and school morning assemblies should be leveraged to raise awareness about the disease and
benefits of MDA with the aim of encouraging community participation in the program.
Prerequisites for community mobilization by frontline health functionaries includes availability
of locally-contextualized IEC material/packages and orientation of said functionaries for
impactful mobilization.

A national-level advisory group will be constituted to help strengthen communication and social
mobilization.
States will follow the national guidelines for communication and social mobilization. Other
initiatives at the state level will include mapping of available platforms and channels and their
reach, ensuring functionality and effectiveness of promoting social mobilization, developing
social mobilization plans for every endemic district, coordination with key persons in select
platforms and channels at the state level.
Social mobilization will be a key component during the planning, implementation and review
stages of state-level meetings. There will be a review mechanism to oversee implementation of
planned communication activities.
A sub-group of the State Task Force committee will review mass media (TV, Radio spots,
newspaper etc.)/IEC and social mobilization planning with districts to ensure that timely
awareness-generation activities are undertaken ahead of scheduled LF MDA rounds in the
states.
Districts will develop district-level communication and social mobilization plans in consultation
with key stakeholders with guidance from the state in a pre-decided format. The plans would
focus on activities for mass awareness and mobilization along with timelines and budgetary
requirements submitted to the state in keeping with timelines. Guidelines for drug
administrators will need to reach them well ahead of the start of drug administration rounds.
Communication:

Communication activities can be broadly divided under the following components although
they are closely linked to each other:

1. Build an enabling environment for APELF. This will entail:

a. Developing communication materials especially for the health care providers to
supplement the new training packages. This will ensure that the health care
providers at every level have a common understanding of the goals and
objectives of the program and interventions that are being implemented
b. Creating a specific communication plan to address and to effectively handle
internal and external communication during adverse events at the district and
state level.
c. Pre-planning and implementing standard protocol to communicate with and
manage the media. A point-person trained to address media queries at the
district and state level will be identified.

Detailed commitment from development partners needs to be defined and their specific
role in implementation of strategy will be worked out under the leadership of NVBDCP.

2. Develop media briefs and specialized APELF-related media kit. This will entail:
 Ensuring that the media is well-briefed about the APELF launch and its rationale
and has access to adequate and correct information, so that erroneous
reportage is minimized
 Contextualizing media kits (comprising LF factsheet, APELF factsheet, press note
on upcoming APELF launch, and so on) by state IEC teams, with support from
partners, in accordance with state-specific requirements to ensure standardized
messaging about the program. Points to remember:
i. Schedule state-level media workshops at least 5-10 days prior to MDA
rounds to sensitize journalists and encourage informed reporting
ii. Sensitize media with correct information about the program, with focus
on need for treatment compliance, benefits, extent and nature of side
effects in rare instances of heavy infection load, and disease
management. Learnings from other public health programs like Mission
Indradhanush, Measles-Rubella vaccine etc. will be adopted
iii. Underline the importance of fact-checking, especially if reporting adverse
situations
iv. Designate single spokesperson from health department for information
dissemination and media briefing
v. Monitor media reports regularly
vi. Conduct advocacy outreach with media house owners with the widest
reach in districts

3. Launch APELF at the state and district levels ensuring participation of senior officials
from relevant departments
4. Explore mobile technology, social and digital media and other innovative techniques to
maximize communication efforts
3.3.4. Action 4: Ensure enhanced MDA in all districts

MDA is the principal strategy of the LF elimination programmes and its aims is to interrupt
transmission of LF. Each endemic district should undergo at least 5 rounds of MDA (DEC+ALB)
over 5 year period, with a minimum treatment coverage of 65% (calculated with total
population of IU/district as denominator) in each MDA round. The large scale MDA programme
in India was initiated in 2004. During 2004-2017, the number of MDAs implemented in different
districts varied widely, depending on starting date of the programme and number of MDAs
required to interrupt transmission. As on 2017, of the 256 endemic districts, MDA has been
completed and stopped in 94 districts and is being continued in 133 districts. Many of the 133
districts had received >6 rounds of MDA, yet LF prevalence continues to be high in a number of
districts. Such high prevalence may be due to operational problems in MDA programme, poor
distribution of drugs and poor compliance with treatment. Therefore, there is a need to

improve the quality of MDA to interrupt LF transmission and stop MDA and meet the goals of
the programme by 2020.

The strategies viz. microplanning needs to be strengthened at district, PHC and village level to
systematically implement the MDA programme in the entire district. Best practices for effective
implementation of MDA will be adopted and these include a sound IEC campaign, social
mobilization strategy and community leadership involvement. To ensure the treatment of all
eligible population, directly observed treatment will be given high priority and implemented in
all districts. This will be accomplished through active involvement of adequate number of drug
administrators and supervisors, house to house drug administration, repeated visits to
households to track and treat all family members, immediate coverage assessment by
supervisors and mopping up operations where required.

Drugs will be administered in each village in a professional manner. The knowledge and abilities
of the health workers and drug administrators will be strengthened through participatory
training and printed guidance material. A multi-layer supervision will be deployed to monitor
the treatment coverage and achieve desired levels of compliance with treatment at PHC, block
and district level. NVBDCP will monitor and supervise MDA implementation including activities
carried out by the partners, particularly in districts that are under prolonged MDA and with
persistent infection. The PHCs will be prepared to manage any adverse events and steps will be
taken – including sensitization of media – to counter any rumours about MDA programme. Each
village will have a contact person with a contact mobile phone number to provide response to
people and families affected with adverse events. The directly observed treatment strategy will
be backed up by careful data recording of treatment details at family and village level and
prompt consolidation and reporting of results from village to PHC to district level.

At the end of the MDA, a coverage survey will be commissioned in as many districts as possible
to understand the actual treatment coverage achieved at district level and further improve the
programme performance in the coming years. The results of the coverage survey along with
reported treatment coverage data will be reviewed jointly by all stakeholders to facilitate their
assessment of the programme. The coverage survey data and reported coverage data will be
reviewed in state level and district level meetings and the additional efforts required for the
next year will be discussed.

Generally, MDA in urban areas is confounded by poor awareness and low confidence about the
programme, people’s reliance on private practitioners for health care (treatment) and
inaccessibility of households to drug distributors and significant heterogeneity in distribution of
disease. The MDA programme in urban areas and migrant population groups will be reviewed
and strengthened.

To implement quality MDA in all districts, the capacity of the health system will be
strengthened by providing additional human and financial resources, good training and logistic
support and utilizations of services of partners. NVBDCP will decide involvement of technical

experts and organizations to the needy states and districts, to guide the implementation of the
programme.

The drug supply management will be improved to ensure on-time delivery of quality drugs and
management of inventory at each district headquarter and health centre.

Quality data collection and prompt reporting of data will be given high priority. The health
workers and drug distributors will be sensitized and trained to record and report accurately the
drug delivery and drug consumption data. The PHC medical officers will be encouraged to
coordinate the collection of data records from each village, consolidate and report the same to
district headquarters promptly. The role of mobile communications in data transfer will be
examined.

3.3.5. Action 5: To introduce innovative preventive chemotherapy strategies
and strengthen supplementary measures

Further to enhance elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis, evidence based and feasible strategy on
triple drug therapy may be undertaken in identified districts.

Extensive IEC/BCC campaign needs to be strengthened in this context. The district and the PHC
level medical officers will be provided a Fact Sheet. Treatment coverage will be the key
determinant of success of the programme. Hence, all steps will be taken for universal treatment
as indicated. Directly observed treatment will be stressed upon.

A road map may be developed for effective implementation of MDA.

Supplementary intervention measures

Taking advantage of the global vector control response adopted by WHA in May 2017, vector
control will be strengthened as a supplementary intervention to MDA programme. A
collaboration will be established with Dengue control programme, JE control programme and
Malaria control programme to promote vector control in all endemic areas, with emphasis on
integrated vector management strategy (WHO, 2012).

DEC medicated salt is an effective intervention measure. Steps may be taken to consider DEC
medicated salt as a supplementary intervention in districts that continue to have above
threshold infection prevalence even after repeated MDAs. Detailed discussion on efforts will be
made to resolve the issues related to production, supply and distribution of medicated salt.

The programme will work in close collaboration with the National Deworming Programme and
share resources, knowledge and experience to improve the implementation of the LF MDA
programme.

3.3.6. Action 6: To strengthen monitoring and surveillance system

M & E and surveillance are key components of the programme and play a very important role in
making crucial decisions such as stopping the MDA. Hence, a dynamic and robust M & E and
surveillance system will facilitate informed decision making.

Under the accelerated plan, the M & E will continue to be based on monitoring of infection
status of adult population in sentinel and spot-check sites and outcomes of transmission
assessment surveys (TAS) among 6-7 year old children. The scale of M & E in terms of number
of sentinel sites and spot-check sites to be surveyed, the survey sample sizes and the frequency
of surveys will be gradually aligned with the recommended guidelines. Assessment of Mf
prevalence, using thick blood smear method, in sentinel and spot-check surveys has been the
mainstay of M & E so far. The thick blood smear method is relatively a less sensitive technique
in detecting infection and there are also concerns about the quality of Mf surveys. Poor quality
surveys weakens the decision making process on stopping the MDA. In view of this, the
SERO/WHO and RPRG recommended in 2017 to replace the Mf assessment with the Ag
assessment, using FTS, in all countries of the region. Hence, all the future M & E surveys in
sentinel and spot-check sites and any other similar surveys will include Ag assessment, using
FTS.

The TAS for stopping MDA and post-MDA surveillance is to be conducted in EUs and the
recommended population size of each EU is <2,000,000. However, many endemic districts (IUs)
have a population in excess of 4,000,000.So, each district will be sub-divided into EUs of about
1,000,000-2,000,000 each and each EU will have contiguous areas (WHO, 2011).

To improve and maintain the quality of the surveys, a national TAS cadre will be built through
enlisting and training of qualified personnel from national programme and collaborating
institutes (such as ICMR centres and NCDC) and development partners and state programmes.
An effective supervision will be put in place to coordinate the TAS each time it is conducted
under NVBDCP.

In the districts that failed TAS, the recommended response measures including assessment
using WHO recommended tools like TAS check list will be implemented to analyze the
operational and technical reasons for failure and determine the course of action for such
districts (WHO, 2015). TAS 1 will be conducted in all districts, only after careful review of MDA
treatment coverage data and sentinel site and spot-check site evaluation data and following the
due process. TAS 1, TAS 2 and TAS 3 will be conducted whenever it is due and without any
delay.
The M & E and surveillance data will be recorded in standard formats, consolidated soon after
completion of TAS in each district and entered into data base.

A TAS 1, TAS 2 and TAS 3 time line will be developed for all endemic districts, after reviewing
the current status of the MDA and surveillance data.

3.3.7 Action 7: To identify all people affected with chronic disease to facilitate
treatment

MMDP is a very critical component of the LF elimination programme and its implementation
per recommended guidelines is essential to begin the process of validation of elimination of LF.
To implement MMDP strategy, the number and location of cases in each district will be
assessed and mapped. The line-listing method will be used to identify and map the patients at
community level. It will be explored to integrate this activity with leprosy detection and kalaazar case detection in co-endemic districts. In different states and UTs the health workers and
partner agencies who will be involved in the disease burden assessment will be identified and
trained. The training will focus on collection of hydrocele data carefully, as the affected people
will be often reluctant to reveal their disease condition. The trained personnel will collect data
under the supervision of the PHC, block and district level health personnel and a time line will
be fixed to complete the activity. The collected data will be systematically organized and
entered into the district, state and national level database. The community level and PHC level
patient lists will be used by the health centres to provide minimum package of care to all the
people affected with chronic disease.

3.3.8. Action 8: To strengthen the health system capacity to provide quality
care for people affected with chronic disease

The health system will be prepared and strengthened to deliver a minimum package of care to
all the affected individuals. All PHCs in LF endemic areas will be assessed and prepared to
provide care for lymphedema management. In each district, the hospitals that have
infrastructure to undertake the hydrocele surgeries will be identified and their capacity
improved. These hospitals will be particularly designated to promote and undertake hydrocele
surgeries. The role of each functionary in health centres and hospitals in relation to providing
care for chronic disease patients will be defined. The recommended minimum package of care
envisaged in GPELF includes treatment of acute ADL episodes, management of lymphedema,
prevention of acute attacks and providing surgery for hydrocele.

All the health workers should be involved in MMDP and they will be trained on lymphoedema
management and treatment and prevention of acute disease episodes. All the hydrocele
patients under each health centre will be counseled to undergo hydrocele surgery in designated
hospitals. The health centres will play active role in facilitating the surgeries and providing and
post-surgery care. The district medical officer and the in-charge of the identified hospitals will
be sensitized on the role and importance of hydrocele surgeries in LF elimination programme.
States will be encouraged to provide incentives to health facilities and patients for hydrocele
surgeries.

All the commodities required for MMDP activities will be budgeted for and procured by each
district health administration. The lymphoedema patients visiting the health centres for
treatment will be provided training on lymphoedema management, education material and

necessary medicines. They will be encouraged to practice home based lymphoedema
management measures and this should be supervised and reported by the health workers.

A comprehensive data management system for MMDP services will be developed and used in
all health facilities, which is important also from the perspective of preparation of dossier.

MMDP policies will be reviewed and updated from time to time and all the improvements in
the guidelines (for example Direct inspection protocol) will be incorporated into the
programme. Gender equity and disability issues of patients will be addressed by the
programme.

3.3.9. Action 9: To ensure quality data management at all levels

An IT based data flow mechanism needs to be explored to ascertain the quality of data and
improve the data management (de Souza et al., 2016).

From time to time, data analysis will be undertaken to assess the progress of the programme,
facilitate informed decision making process and plan future course of action. The outcome of
analyses will be shared with all stakeholders and through display in programme website.

3.3.10. Action 10. To build stronger and sustainable partnerships

The strengths of national and international partners of the programme will be leveraged and
their expertise harnessed to conduct training courses, refine the programme implementation,
undertake joint supervision, introduce new diagnostic and intervention tools and strategies and
establish strong data management systems. Steps will be taken to expand the pool of partners
and collaborators from various parts of the country to meet the resources required to
implement quality MDA and MMDP activities and strengthen M & E and surveillance activities.
The role of each partner will be identified and regular coordination meetings will be held with
the national programme.

3.3.11. Action 11: To support operational research

The programme will enhance collaboration with local and international research institutions,
NGOs and medical colleges and seek their active support for resolution of operational problems
through research and training. The important areas of research identified by the programme
include:

i. improvement of compliance of MDA
ii. feasibility of introduction of triple drug therapy
iii. development of criteria to identify areas for targeted MDA in urban areas
iv. development of feasible and cost-effective post-TAS surveillance strategies

v. standardization of threshold level of pre-TAS 1 Ag prevalence, assessed using FTS, for
sentinel site and spot check sites
vi. development of innovative data transfer and data management tools and systems

3.3.12. Action 12: Preparation of dossier for validation of elimination of LF

There are 21 endemic states and union territories in India. The status of the programme differs
widely across the states. While a majority of districts in some states are implementing MDA, it
is completed and stopped in some states and post-MDA surveillance is under progress. As state
after state completes and stops MDA and surveillance activities are put in place, steps will be
initiated to prepare a dossier document.

The dossier document will be prepared using the templates and guidelines provided by WHO.
All the programme managers of all the states will be provided with copies of the dossier
templates and encouraged to provide all the information required for the dossier. All the data
for all endemic districts will be consolidated and summarized in the dossier document. The
dossier document will be updated from time to time to facilitate the preparation of the final
dossier document.

References
de Souza DK et al. (2016) Assessing Lymphatic Filariasis Data Quality in Endemic Communities in
Ghana, Using the Neglected Tropical Diseases Data Quality Assessment Tool for Preventive
Chemotherapy. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 10(3): e0004590.
Gass KM (2017) The rationale and cost-effectiveness of a confirmatory mapping tool for
lymphatic filariasis: Examples from Ethiopia and Tanzania. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 11 (10):
e0005944.
King CL et al.(2017) Superior Efficacy of Co-Administered Single Dose Therapy with
Diethylcarbamazine,
Albendazole,
and
Ivermectin
versus
Standard
Therapy
(Diethylcarbamazine with Albendazole) for Bancroftian Filariasis in Papua New Guinea (to be
submitted for publication).

Ramaiah KD and Ottesen EA (2014) Progress and impact of 13 years of the global programme to
eliminate lymphatic filariasis on reducing the burden of filarial disease.PLoS Negl Trop Dis 8
(11): e3319.
Thomsen EK et al. (2015) Efficacy, safety, and pharmacokinetics of coadministered
diethylcarbamazine, albendazole and ivermectin for treatment of bancroftian filariasis.Clinical
Infectious Diseases62(3):334-341. doi: 10.1093/cid/civ882.
WHO (1994) Lymphatic filariasis infection and disease: Control strategies. Report of a
Consultative meeting held at the Universiti Sains Malaysia, Penang, Malaysia.
WHO
(2011)
Global
programme
to
eliminate
lymphatic
filariasis.Monitoring
and
epidemiological assessment of mass drug administration. A manual for national elimination
programmes. WHO, Geneva.

WHO (2012) Handbook for integrated vector management.WHO/HTM/NTD/VEM/2012.3
WHO (2015) Responding to failed transmission assessment surveys. Report of an Ad hoc
meeting.Strategic and Technical Advisory Group for Neglected Tropical Diseases Sub-group on
Disease Specific Indicators.WHO/HTM/NTD/PCT/2016.10
WHO (2017) Global programme to eliminate lymphatic filariasis: Progress report 2016. WHO
Weekly Epidemiological Record 40: 589-608.

Abbreviations

Antibody
Ag
Antigen
ALB
Albendazole
DEC
Diethylcarbamazine citrate
EU
Evaluation Unit
GPELF
Global Programme to Eliminate Lymphatic Filariasis
IEC
Information, education and communication
IU
Implementation Unit
IVR
Ivermectin
LF
Lymphatic Filariasis
M&E
Monitoring and Evaluation
MDA
Mass Drug Administration
NFCP
National Filaria Control Programme
M & E
Monitoring and evaluation
MMDP
Morbidity Management and Disease Prevention
Mf
Microfilaria
SEAR
South-east Asia Region
NTD
Neglected Tropical Diseases
TAS
Transmission assessment survey
WHO
World Health Organization

Glossary

Adverse event (AE) following mass drug administration (MDA)
A medical incident that takes place after MDA and is suspected to be but is not necessarily caused by the
medicines used in the intervention. Some AEs, after investigation, may be found to have been caused by
the medicine. Such AEs will also be referred to as adverse drug reactions or side effects. Note: AEs are
often categorized by severity in clinical studies. While the severity grade may vary, for the outcomes
reviewed in these comparisons, the following classifications were used:

Antibody
A protein produced by the human immune system in response to a foreign substance (antigen) to fight
off infection. An antibody reacts specifically with the antigen that triggered its formation and its function
is to facilitate removal of the antigen from the body.

Antigen (Ag)
Any foreign substance that stimulates the human immune system to produce antibodies.

At-risk population
Total population in the endemic implementation unit(s).

Brugia malayi area, Wuchereria bancrofti area
Geographical areas with established transmission of the disease caused by the respective parasite.

Clinical case of lymphatic filariasis (LF)
Case in a resident of or long-term visitor to an endemic area, with hydrocoele, chylocoele,
lymphoedema (elephantiasis), chyluria, haematochyluria, haematuria, hypereosinophilia or tropical
pulmonary eosinophilia syndrome for which other causes have been excluded.

Complete microfilaraemia (mf) clearance
Occurrence of zero microfilariae detected in sampled blood following treatment. Designated as a
“critical” outcome in the recommendation formulation process).

Critical cut-off threshold
The threshold of infection prevalence below which transmission is likely no longer sustainable, even in
the absence of control interventions. The transmission assessment survey estimates this threshold by
the number of antigen-positive or antibody-positive cases.

Disability
Inability to adequately or independently perform routine daily activities such as walking, bathing and
toileting; the negative aspects of the interaction between a person with a health condition and his or
her context (environmental and personal factors)

Drug coverage
Proportion of individuals, expressed as a percentage, in a targeted population who swallowed a drug, or
a combination of drugs.

Effective coverage
Drug coverage during MDA where ≥65% of the total population ingested the medicine.

Elephantiasis
Severe or advanced lymphedema.

Elimination as a public health problem
The achievement of specific and measurable targets for infection and disease set by the World Health
Organization and when reached, continued actions are required to maintain this status. Surveillance will
be required to ensure infection remains below target thresholds and to verify interruption of
transmission.

Endemic area
Implementation unit where a proper sample of the population has an antigenaemia or microfilaraemia
positivity rate equal to or greater than 1%.

Epidemiological coverage
Proportion of individuals who have ingested the MDA drugs among the total population in the
implementation unit. Minimum epidemiological coverage considered effective for reducing LF
transmission is ≥65%.

Filarial infection
Presence of adult filarial worms in lymphatic vessels or of microfilariae in blood.

Geographical coverage
Proportion of administrative units that are implementing MDA of all those that require MDA.

Hydrocele
Excess fluid inside the scrotal sac that causes the scrotum to swell or enlarge.

Implementation unit (IU)
The smallest administrative unit in a country which is used as the basis for making decisions about
implementing MDA. The IU must be defined before mapping takes place. For LF, the implementation
unit is normally the district.

Interruption of transmission of lymphatic filariasis
Reduction in the prevalence of infection to a level where continued transmission and recrudescence are
not expected.

Lymphatic filariasis (LF)
A parasitic disease of humans caused by nematodes (worms) of the Filariodidea family.Wuchereria
bancrofti cause the majority (90%) of human infections, which are mostly acquired in childhood; Brugia

malayi and Brugia timori cause the remainder. Anopheles, Aedes,Culex and Mansonia mosquitoes are
the main vectors responsible for transmission. Mosquitoes serve as biological hosts that both develop
and transmit the parasite during blood-feeding and establish the infection in humans.

Lymphatic system
The delicate network of nodes and vessels that maintain the delicate balance between the tissues and
blood in humans. The lymphatic system is an essential component of the body’s immune defense
system.

Lymphedema
Swelling caused by the collection of fluid in tissue.

Macrofilaricide (for LF)
A drug that displays destructive properties against the adult worms in the body of people with LF.

Mass drug administration (MDA)
A modality of preventive chemotherapy in which anthelminthic medicines are administered to the entire
eligible population of an area (e.g., state, region, province, district, subdistrict, village) at regular
intervals, irrespective of the individual infection status.

MDA round
Distribution of antifilarial medicines to the target population during a defined time period. Normally,
MDA activities may not be conducted simultaneously throughout a country, so a “round” may take
oneto two weeks or more before being completed at a national level. An “effective MDA round” or
reaching “effective coverage” during an MDA round is defined by epidemiological coverage ≥65% in an
implementation unit.

Microfilaraemia (mf)
Presence of microfilariae in the blood.

Microfilaraemia prevalence
Proportion of persons with microfilariae in blood.

Microfilaraemia prevalence reduction
Percent reduction in mf prevalence.

Microfilariae
Microscopic larval stage of LF parasites that circulate in the blood and are transmitted by mosquitoes.

Microfilaricide (for LF)
A drug that displays destructive properties against microfilariae in the blood of people infected with LF.

Morbidity
Clinical consequences of infections and diseases that adversely affect the health of individuals.
Lymphatic filariasis causes chronic morbidity through damage to the lymphatic system, kidneys, arms,
legs or genitals (especially in men).

Neglected tropical diseases (NTD)
A group of primarily infectious diseases which thrive in impoverished settings, especially in the heat and
humidity of tropical climates. They have been largely eliminated elsewhere and thus are often forgotten.
WHO focuses on control of 19 NTDs: buruli ulcer, chagas disease, dengue and chikungunya,
dracunculiasis,
echinococcosis,
foodborne-trematodiases,
human
African
trypanosomiasis,
leishmaniasis, leprosy, lymphatic filariasis, mycetoma, onchocerciasis, rabies, schistosomiasis, soiltransmitted helminthiases, taeniasis/cysticercosis, trachoma and yaws (endemic treponematoses).

Pharmacovigilance
The science and activities relating to the detection, assessment, understanding and prevention of
adverse effects or any other possible drug-related problems. Pharmacovigilance is an arm of patient
care, aiming to make the best use of medicines for the treatment or prevention of disease. Good
pharmacovigilance will identify the risks and the risk factors in the shortest possible time so that harm
can be avoided or minimized.

Pre-transmission assessment survey (pre-TAS)
Follow-up assessments of sentinel and spot-check sites after five effective rounds of MDA. ‘Passing’ preTAS is defined as <1% microfilaraemia or <2% antigenemia in sentinel and spot-check sites. If pre-TAS is
passed, an IU may progress to the TAS.

Preventive chemotherapy
Preventive chemotherapy is treating populations at high risk of neglected tropical diseases, to prevent
transmission or reduce morbidity of those affected by the diseases, with quality assured medicines.

Sentinel site
A geographical area, with a population of at least 500 people, selected in order to collect parasitological
data to monitor the success of the programme. It should remain the same throughout the course of the
programme. Sentinel site assessments are conducted (along with spot-check site assessments) at
baseline, at the mid-term (optional) and during the pre-TAS (pre-transmission assessment survey).

Serious adverse events (SAE) following MDA
Any untoward medical occurrence that at any dose results in death, requires hospital admission or
prolongation of existing hospital stay, results in persistent or significant disability/ incapacity, or is life
threatening; cancers and congenital anomalies or birth defects should be regarded as serious; medical
events that would be regarded as serious if they had not responded to acute treatment should also be
considered serious. (In the studies reviewed, any Grade 4 or 5 AE or any overnight admission to a health
facility was considered an SAE.

Spot-check site
A geographical area, with a population of at least 500 people, selected in order to collect parasitological
data to complement data collected in sentinel sites. Spot-check sites should be chosen for each
assessment and will change over the course of the programme. Spot-check site assessments are
conducted (along with sentinel site assessments) at baseline, at the mid-term and during the pre-TAS
(pre-transmission assessment survey).

Surveillance
The ongoing, systematic collection and evaluation of data describing the occurrence and spread of
disease. The part of the programme aimed at the discovery, investigation and elimination of continuing

transmission, the prevention and cure of infections, and the final substantiation of claimed absence of
transmission.

Target population (LF target population = eligible population)
Population in an implementation unit that is targeted for treatment. In the context of lymphatic
filariasis, the target population for mass drug administration is the same as the population eligible to
receive the medicines, according to the criteria for drug safety, which is usually 80 to 90% of the total
population.

Transmission assessment survey (TAS)
A survey designed to measure whether evaluation units have lowered the prevalence of infection to a
level where recrudescence is unlikely to occur, even in the absence of MDA interventions. TAS is a
decision-making tool to determine when MDA can stop.

Validation (of the elimination of LF as a public health problem)
Validation is the process of documenting the elimination of LF as a public health problem through a
validation dossier and receiving approval for the achievement from the World Health Organization.
Validation is not a permanent state and does not represent an end to programme activities. While some
activities, such as MDA, may no longer be required, programmes should continue to undertake postvalidation surveillance and ensure the minimum package of care for patients remains available within
the health care system.

Revised Guideline
on Elimination of
Lymphatic Filariasis

National Centre for Vector Borne Diseases Control (NCVBDC)
Directorate General of Health Services, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,
Government of India
Government of India

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis
i
Foreword

Preface

xvii
Acknowledge

Abbreviations

Chapter-1

Epidemiology and Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis Programme

1.1 Introduction

1.2 Life cycle of the parasite

1.3 Clinical spectrum

1.4 Global Programme for Elimination of LF and Disease Burden

1.5 Elimination of LF and Disease Burden in India

1.6 Programme implementation

1.7 Committees (Institutional Mechanisms) for Implementation of ELF programme

1.8 Progress of Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis in India (2004-2023)

Chapter 2

Mapping of Lymphatic Filariasis

2.1 Introduction

2.2 Implementation unit as the basis of sampling for delineation of LF endemicity

2.3 LF mapping method

Chapter 3

Enhanced five-pronged strategy for Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

3.1 Introduction

3.2 Enhanced Strategies for Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Chapter 4

Mass Drug Administration

4.1: Introduction

4.2 Pre MDA

4.3 During MDA

4.4 Post MDA

Chapter 5

Diagnostic Tools

5.1 Introduction

5.2 Blood testing for Mf

5.3 CFA assessment using FTS

5.4 Antibody assessment using Brugia rapid test

Chapter- 6

Early Diagnosis and Treatment of Lymphatic Filariasis

6.1 Introduction

6.2 Pathogenesis and Pathology

6.3 Asymptomatic Presentations

6.4 Diagnostic methods for detection of early stages of Lymphatic filariasis

6.5 Treatment of all Mf and Ag positive cases and Algorithm for Management

CONTENT

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis
ii
Chapter- 7

Morbidity Management & Disability Prevention (MMDP)

7.1 Introduction

7.2 Line Listing and Registration of LF cases

7.3 Staging and Grading of Lymphoedema cases

7.4 Morbidity Management and Disability Prevention

Chapter 8

The Social and Behaviour Change (SBC) and Advocacy For ELF

8.1: Introduction

8.2 SBC activities

8.3 Focused SBC Activities in Urban areas

Chapter 9

Monitoring and Evaluation of Lymphatic Filariasis Programme

9.1 Introduction - Monitoring of MDA round

9.2. Reporting formats and tables for LF programme data

9.3 Activities and Surveillance after stopping MDA (Post MDA Surveillance)

9.4 Post MDA Surveillance

9.5 Documenting the Best Practices and Lessons Learnt

9.6 Monitoring indicators for LF programme

Chapter 10

Coverage Evaluation Survey

10.1 Introduction

10.2 Coverage Evaluation Survey

10.3 Methodology and Process

10.4 Suggestive Reporting Template

Chapter 11

Vectors of Lymphatic Filariasis and their management

11.1. Introduction

11.2. Vector morphology & Bionomics

11.3.Vector Surveillance

11.4.Vector Control

Chapter 12

Roles and Responsibilities

12.1 Roles and responsibilities of programme managers

12.2 Roles and responsibilities of PHC/UHC Medical Officer/MHO

12.3 Roles and responsibilities of supervisory staff, DAs and Health Workers

Annexures

1. Details of Task Force/Coordination Committee Meetings

2. Family Register

3. Micro Plans

4. Night Blood Survey Monitoring and Post NBSActivity Monitoring Check List

5. Line Listing of Mf/Ag Positive Patients

6. Patient Card

6. (A And B) Lymphoedema and Hydrocele

7. MDA Preparedness Checklist – State/District/Block or IU

8. Concurrent Monitoring at Implementation Unit Level

9. Reporting Formats

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis
xvii
PREFACE
In the last few decades, there has been a remarkable effort in the field of health as numerous initiatives have
been taken to address individual and population health. Lymphatic Filariasis (LF) is a vector-borne disfiguring
and disabling disease that remains a significant public health problem in India. Over the last few years, our
country has made strong strides towards eliminating LF. By scaling up Mass Drug Administration (MDA)
rounds across endemic districts and ensuring access to Morbidity Management and Disability Prevention
(MMDP), the government’s National Centre for Vector Borne Disease Control (NCVBDC) has significantly
improved outcomes for those living with the effects of LF.
The previous edition of “Guidelines on Filariasis Control in India and Its Elimination” were released in 2009.
During the ensuing period, many valuable lessons have been learned by the program and newer strategies like
triple-drug therapy, smaller implementation units (block)/evaluation unit strategy, enhanced five-pronged
strategy and focus on Urban MDA, early diagnosis and treatment, vector management, etc. have been
incorporated in the revised Lymphatic Filariasis guidelines.
The revised guidelines have been carefully reviewed and updated based on the latest scientific evidence and
recommendations from experts in the field. These revised Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis (ELF) guidelines
are envisaged to:
-
Provide useful resources for program managers and stakeholders across all levels and will provide
comprehensive technical guidance on implementing various activities, management, and disease control
towards achieving the elimination goal.
-
Serve as an operational guide for various LF related activities to be performed across various levels of the
system.
The Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis is poised to play a critical role in effective
program management, a cornerstone for ensuring LF elimination from India.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis
xix
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The formulation of the Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis (LF) Programme is a
collaborative effort involving senior government officials, technical experts, and partners. Their expertise,
commitment, support, and guidance have shaped this comprehensive guideline. As we delve into the details of
the Revised Guideline on the Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis Programme, we acknowledge and appreciate
the invaluable contributions of these individuals and organizations in our pursuit of an LF-free future.
The guidelines were extensively reviewed, revised, and drafted by a core group of experts. We also express our
gratitude to other experts who contributed to the discussions /deliberations held during various meetings to
revise the guidelines.
Core Experts
Dr. Atul Goel, Director General of Health Services, MoHFW
Ms. L S Changsan, Additional Secretary, MoHFW
Mr. Rajiv Manjhi, Ex-Joint Secretary, VBD, MoHFW
Dr. Tanu Jain, Director, NCVBDC
Dr. Neeraj Dhingra, Ex-Director, NCVBDC
Dr. Nupur Roy, Senior CMO, SAG, NCVBDC
Dr. Chhavi Pant Joshi, Joint Director, NCVBDC
Dr. Pranab Jyoti Bhuyan, Additional Director, NCVBDC
Dr. Kalpana Baruah, Senior Consultant, NCVBDC
Dr. Atul Mittal, WJCF, Technical Support Unit, NCVBDC
Mr. Jayaram Parasa, WJCF, Technical Support Unit, NCVBDC
Dr. Manik Relan, WJCF, Technical Support Unit, NCVBDC
Prof. (Dr.) Suma Krishna Sastry, Ex-Director, Filariasis Research Unit (WHO Collaborating Centre for LF MMDP)
Dr. K. Krishnamoorthy, Ex VCRC
Dr. Ramaiah Kapa, Ex VCRC
Other Experts
Prof. (Dr.) N.K. Ganguly, Former Director General, ICMR
Dr. Ashwini Kumar, Ex- Director VCRC, Puducherry
Late Dr. N S Dharamshaktu, Former Deputy- Director-General Health Services
Prof. Arvind Pandey, Ex Director- NIMS
Dr. A.P. Dash, Ex Vice Chancellor, Central University, Tamil Nadu
Dr MPS Chawla, Head of Department, Medicine, Atal Bihari Vajpayee Institute of Medical Sciences and Dr. Ram Manohar
Lohia Hospital
Dr. Saurabh Varshney, Executive Director & CEO, AIIMS Deoghar
Prof. (Dr.) Pratima Gupta, Professor & Head, Microbiology, AIIMS Deoghar
ICMR -VCRC
Dr. Manju Rahi, Director, VCRC

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis
xx
ICMR NIMS, Delhi
Dr. M Vishnu Vardhana Rao, Director, NIMS
Regional Directors, ROHFW
Dr. Suchitra Sasmal, Sr. RD Odisha, Dr Nilam Somalkar, RD, Odisha, Dr. Smita Rawat, Sr CMO (SAG) Karnataka,
State Programme Officers
Dr V.P. Singh SPO, Uttar Pradesh, and Dr Subhashish Mohanty, SPO, Odisha
Partners
BMGF: Dr. Bhupendra Tripathi, Dr. Amol Patil, Dr. Vishal Dogra
WHO: Dr. Jonathan King, Dr. Kamalakar Lashkare,
PCI: Ms. Rajshree Das, Mr. Ranpal Singh
Piramal Swasthya: Mr. Bikas Sinha
PATH: Dr. Satyabrata Routray, Dr. Amresh Kumar
GHS: Mr Anuj Ghosh, Ms. Tania Lal

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis
xxi
ABBREVIATIONS
ACMO
Additional Chief Medical Officer
ADLA

Acute Dermatolymphangioadenitis
ALB

Albendazole
AAM

Ayushman Arogya Mandir
ANM

Auxiliary Nurse Midwife
APELF
Accelerated Plan for Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis
ASHA

Accredited Social Health Activist
ASI

Association of Surgeons of India
AV

Audio Visual
AWW

Anganwadi Worker
BCC

Block Coordination Committee
BCC

Behavior Change Communication
BCM

Block Community Mobilizer
BDOs

Block Development Officers
BEO

Block Education officer
BMO

Block Medical Officer
BTF

Block Task Force
BWSC

Block Water and Sanitation Committee
CDPO

Child Development Project Officer
AWC

Anganwadi Centre
CFA

Circulating Filarial Antigen
CFA

Circulating Filarial Antigen
CHCs

Community Health Centers
CHW

Community Health Worker
CMO

Chief Medical Officer
CS

Civil Surgeon
CSR

Corporate Social Responsibility
DA

Double Drug Administration (DEC + ALB)
DALYs
Disability-Adjusted Life Years
DAs

Drug Administrators
DCC

District Coordination Committee
DCs

District Collectors
DEC

Diethyl Carbamazepine
DGHS

Directorate General of Health Services
DHS

Directorate of Health Services
DMO

District Malaria Officer
DMs

District Magistrates
DOC

Directly Observed Consumption (Administration of MDA drugs)
DVBDCO
District Vector borne Disease Control Officer
DWSC
District Water and Sanitation Committee
ELF

Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis
EPBs

Expanded Polystyrene Beads
EU

Evaluation Unit
FAQ

Frequently Asked Questions
FLWs

Front Line Workers
FTS

Filaria Test Strip
GPELF
Global Program for Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis
HSCs

Health Sub Center
HtH

House to House
IAP

Indian Academy of Pediatrics
ICDS

Integrated Child Development Scheme
IHIP

Integrated Health Information Platform
ICT

Immunochromatographic test
IDA

Triple Drug Administration (IVR+ DEC+ ALB)

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis
xxii
IEC

Information, Education and Communication
IMA

Indian Medical Association
IPC

Interpersonal Communication
M&E

Monitoring & Evaluation
IU

Implementation Unit
IVR

Ivermectin
LF

Lymphatic Filariasis
LLIN

Long Lasting Insecticidal Nets
MDA

Mass Drug Administration
Mf

Microfilaria
MLA

Member of Legislative Assembly
MLC

Member of Legislative Council
MMDP
Morbidity Management and Disability Prevention
MO

Medical Officer
MoHFW
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
MOIC

Medical Officer In charge
MP

Member of Parliament
MPW

Multipurpose Worker
MSG

Mission Steering Group
NBS

Night Blood Survey
NCC

National Cadet Corps
NCVBDC
National Centre for Vector Borne Diseases Control
NDD

National Deworming Day
NGOs

Non-Governmental Organizations
NHM

National Health Mission
NPSP

National Polio Surveillance Project
NSS

National Service Scheme
NTD

Neglected Tropical Disease
NTEC

National Technical Expert Committee
NUHM
National Urban Health Mission
NULM
National Urban Livelihood Mission
NYK

Nehru Yuva Kendra
PHC

Primary Health Centre
PIP

Project Implementation Plans
PMJAY
Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojna
PRI

Panchayati Raj Institution
RBSK

Rastriya Bal Suraksha Karyakram
RRT

Rapid Response Teams
RWAs

Resident Welfare Associations
SBC

Social Behaviour Communication
SBM(G)
Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin)
SCC

State Coordination Committee
SC

Sub Centre
SHG

Self Help Group
STAC

State Technical Advisory Committee
STF

State Task force
TAS

Transmission Assessment Survey
TPE

Tropical Pulmonary Eosinophilia
UC

Utilization Certificate
UPHC

Urban Primary Health Centre
URN

Unique Registration Number
VBDs

Vector Borne Diseases
VBDC

Vector Borne Disease Consultant.
VHSNC
Village Health Sanitation and Nutrition Committee
VWSC
Village Water and Sanitation Committee
WHO

World Health Organization

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Chapter-1
EPIDEMIOLOGY AND ELIMINATION OF
LYMPHATIC FILARIASIS PROGRAMME
-
As of 2023, 345 districts in India are endemic for Lymphatic Filariasis (LF), with a population of about
740 million at risk.
-
Lymphatic Filariasis ceases to be a public health problem when the Microfilariae rate of <1% or
Antigenemia Rate of <2% is achieved.
-
India introduced the enhanced five-pronged strategy in 2023 to accelerate the elimination of LF.
-
In India, Wuchereria bancrofti, transmitted by Culex quinquefasciatus has been the predominant
infection contributing to 99.4 % of the problem in the country.
-
The life span of adult worms is 6-7 years and after mating each female worm produces millions of
microfilarae (Mf)
1.1 Introduction
Lymphatic filariasis (LF) is a mosquito borne parasitic disease caused by thread-like nematode worms. The
disease is widespread and a significant public health problem in many states and union territories of India. The
LF disease is categorized as a Neglected Tropical Disease by WHO, however, for India it is one of the priority
diseases targeted for elimination. LF disproportionately affects impoverished communities, perpetuating
and exacerbating poverty. In communities where filariasis is endemic, all ages are affected. While the infection
may be acquired during childhood, its visible manifestations such as limbs oedema may occur later in life,
causing temporary or permanent disability.
Parasite
LF is caused by three filarial parasites – Wuchereria bancrofti, Brugia malayi and B. timori. W. bancrofti is the
main parasite responsible for the transmission of LF in India and its prevalence across the endemic districts,
however B. malayi is restricted to some districts of Kerala and Odisha. The Micro filaria (Mf) of both the
parasites exhibit nocturnal periodicity and are transmitted by nocturnal mosquitoes. However, the timori
is not found in India. The details of these parasites and their characteristics are mentioned in the following
Table 1.1

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Table 1.1: Characteristics of B. malayi and W.bancrofti
Characteristics
B. malayi
W. bancrofti
Geographical distribution
Some endemic districts of Odisha
and Kerala
Endemic districts of India
Vectors
Mosquitoes (Anopheles & Mansonia
Species)
Mosquitoes (Culex, Aedes, Anopheles
& Mansonia Species)
Habitat
Adults
Lymphatic System
Lymphatic System
Microfilariae
Blood
Blood
Periodicity of Microfilariae
Nocturnal
Nocturnal
Morphology of Microfilariae
Sheath
Present
Present
Length(μm)
175-230 (in films); 240-300
(in 2% formalin)
240-300 (in films); 275-320
(in 2% formalin)
Width (μm)
5.0-6.0
7.5-10.0
Tail
Tapered; sub-terminal and terminal
nuclei widely separated
Tapered; anucleate
Key Features
Long head space, sheath stains pink
in Giemsa; terminal and sub-terminal
nuclei
Short head space; sheath unstained
in Giemsa; body in smooth curves;
dispersed nuclei
Vector
In India, 99.4% of infections are caused by Wuchereria bancrofti and rest by Brugia malayi. The transmission
of LF occurs through mosquitoes, i.e Culex quinquefasciatus and humans are the exclusive host of infection.
For further details on Vector, please refer to chapter 11.
1.2 Life cycle of the parasite
The parasites responsible for this condition are thread-like worms known as filariae. They undergo development
within the lymphatic vessels, leading to detrimental effects on the human lymphatic system and its associated
tissues. Often contracted during childhood, this affliction profoundly impacts the body’s intricate network of
vessels and specialized tissues. The lymphatic system is crucial for maintaining fluid balance, organ health,
and serving as a cornerstone of the body’s immune defense. However, the presence of filariae or adult worms
within this system disrupts its delicate equilibrium, resulting in the retention of fluid within tissues. This
disruption manifests as chronic swelling, mostly observed in the lower limbs.
Adult worms survive for 4-6 years, generating millions of microfilariae that circulate in the bloodstream, at
night. Mosquitoes ingest these microfilariae during blood meals, where they mature into infective larvae.
Subsequent mosquito bites transmit these larvae to another healthy person. Upon transmission, the larvae
migrate through the skin to the lymphatic vessels, where they develop into adult worms. The development
cycle of the parasite is depicted in the below Figure 1.1 that can be understood to undergo eight stages of
development as explained below:

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

During a blood meal, an infected mosquito introduces third-stage filarial larvae onto the skin of the human host,
where they penetrate the bite wound.1 They develop in adults that commonly reside in the lymphatics.2 The
female worms measure 80 to 100 mm in length and 0.24 to 0.30 mm in diameter, while the males measure about
40 mm by .1 mm. Adults produce microfilariae measuring 244 to 296 μm by 7.5 to 10 μm, which are sheathed
and have nocturnal periodicity. The microfilariae migrate into lymph and blood channels moving actively through
lymph and blood.3 A mosquito ingests the microfilariae during a blood meal.4 After ingestion, the microfilariae
lose their sheaths and some of them work their way through the wall of the proventriculus and cardiac portion
of the mosquito’s midgut and reach the thoracic muscles.5 There the microfilariae develop into first-stage larvae6
and subsequently into third-stage infective larvae.7 The third-stage infective larvae migrate through the hemocoel
to the mosquito’s proboscis8 and can infect another human when the mosquito takes a blood meal.1
1.3 Clinical spectrum
LF is characterized by a wide range of acute and chronic clinical features. The acute form of the disease is
called adenolymphangitis (ADL) and encompasses acute dermatolymphangioadenitis (ADLA) and acute
filarial lymphangitis (AFL). ADLA, defined as acute inflammation of the skin, lymph vessels, and lymph
glands associated with secondary bacterial infection, is more commonly termed acute attack and requires
antibiotic therapy. Acute filarial lymphangitis involves inflammation caused by the death of adult worms and
is self-limited. Chronic manifestations include. lymphoedema and hydrocele. For further details on treatment,
please refer to Chapter 7.
1.4 Global Programme for Elimination of LF and Disease Burden
Following the World Health Assembly resolution in 1997, and encouraged by innovations in diagnostics and
treatment, WHO launched a Global Program to Eliminate LF (GPELF) in the year 2000.
The objective of GPELF was to eliminate LF as a public health problem, which translates into reducing the
prevalence of LF infection below a threshold level. The strategy of GPELF was two-fold: 1) to stop the
transmission of infection with mass drug administration (MDA), and 2) to alleviate suffering among people
affected by the disease through morbidity management and disability prevention (MMDP).
Figure 1.1: Life Cycle - Wuchereria bancrofti

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

MDA not
started.
MDA started but
not at scale
MDA scaled to all endemic
IUs
Post-MDA
Surveillance
Elimination as
a public health
problem
Gabon
Angola, Central
African Republic,
Madagascar,
Nigeria,
Sudan,
Papua New Guinea
Burkina Faso, Chad, Comoros,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire,
Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Equatorial Guinea,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, Liberia,
Mozambique, Niger, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, South Sudan,
United Republic of Tanzania,
Zambia, Zimbabwe, Guyana,
Haiti, India, Indonesia,
Myanmar, Nepal, American
Samoa, Fiji, French Polynesia,
Federated States of Micronesiaa,
Malaysia, New Caledonia,
Philippines, Samoa, Tuvalu
Benin, Cameroon,
Eritrea, Mali,
Sao Tome and
Principe, Uganda
Brazil, Dominican
Republic,
Timor-Leste,
Brunei Darussalam
Egypt, Yemen,
Togo, Malawi,
Bangladesh,
Maldives, Sri Lanka,
Thailand, Cambodia,
the Cook Islands,
Kiribati, Marshall
Islands, Niue, Palau,
Tonga, Vanuatu, Viet
Nam, Laos, Wallis
and Futuna,

1.5 Elimination of LF and Disease Burden in India
LF has been widely prevalent and is a serious public health problem in India. The National Filaria Control
Program (NFCP), established in 1955 to combat the disease, yielded only limited results. Its strategy, focusing
on the detection and treatment of Mf carriers and vector control, was implemented only in a limited number
of urban areas. A vast majority of the endemic population in rural areas could not be covered by the program,
due to lack of infrastructure and low prioritization of the disease.
A pilot project to eliminate LF, using annual single-dose MDA (Diethylcarbamazine alone), was started
in 1996-1997 in 13 districts of 7 states. This enabled the national program to understand the logistics and
operational aspects of the program. The project was extended to 31 districts in 2002, and Diethylcarbamazine
(DEC) + Albendazole (ALB) combination therapy was implemented in some districts.
In 2004, the National Program was launched, covering 202 districts in 20 states and union territories.
Subsequently, the program was further scaled up to 345 districts. Since 2007, the program has been
implementing DEC+ALB combination therapy in all districts. In 2018, during the 10th GPELF meeting &
launch of Accelerated Plan for Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis (APELF), triple drug therapy (Ivermectin
+ DEC + ALB) was introduced as a pilot in 5 districts of five states. As of December 2023, 76 districts across
10 states have conducted at least one round of IDA. The APELF revitalized ongoing efforts by incorporating
objectives, innovative interventions, and enhancing MDA, monitoring & evaluation, and surveillance methods.
The objectives included to:
-
Accelerate interruption of transmission in all endemic districts using enhanced preventive chemotherapy
strategies.
-
Provide a minimum package of care to all people affected with chronic disease to alleviate suffering.
-
Augment the program activities towards preparation of LF elimination validation dossier.
Globally, among the 72 LF- endemic countries and territories, the following table 1.2 presents the country
status in implementing MDA for LF elimination (2022)
Table 1.2: Global LF endemic countries and territories status and MDA status

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

India, being a signatory to the World Health Assembly resolution in
1997, initially aimed to eliminate filariasis by 2015, a goal that was
later aligned with the global target of 2030 and aiming to achieve
an Mf rate of less than one in endemic areas. For this, the MoHFW
has developed the enhanced five-pronged strategy with new
interventions to further accelerate the progress towards elimination.
In the year 2023, 20 states and union territories with 345 districts
are endemic for LF, of which 170 districts implemented MDA
campaign and 138 districts have stopped MDA and cleared
Transmission Assessment Survey 1 (TAS1), with the remaining 37
districts in various stages of assessments. The reported number of
chronic cases of Lymphedema and Hydrocele are 0.62 million and
0.12 million respectively (2023). The patients are being provided
with the recommended minimum package of care to alleviate suffering and improve the quality of life. Under
the program, a cumulative total of 2,13,208 hydrocelectomies have been performed till end of 2023 to improve
the condition of the affected people.
1.6 Programme implementation
The National Centre for Vector Borne Diseases Control (NCVBDC) is the nodal agency responsible for
implementing the Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis (ELF). The NCVBDC implements the ELF under the
ambit of National Health Mission (NHM). The program is implemented under the close monitoring of the
MOHFW (as shown in Figure 1.3).
The Director-General of Health Services (DGHS) periodically reviews the program and guides the policy
framework. NCVBDC provides policy guidance, technical guidelines, financial support and facilitates
procurement of drugs and diagnostic kits. The states/union territories plan and implement the program and
meet the targets as envisaged by the national program.
At the district level, the program implementation is managed by the Additional Chief Medical Officer (ACMO)
or the District Vector Borne Disease Control Officer (DVBDCO). The Primary Health Centre (PHC) medical
officer/urban medical and public health officer is responsible for the program implementation within the
blocks/ Implementation unit.
Multipurpose Workers (MPW)/Multipurpose Health Workers (MPHW)/Accredited Social Health Activist
(ASHA) facilitators, Block Community Mobilizer (BCM) supports and supervises the program implementation,
and ASHA/Auxiliary Nurse Midwife (ANM) implement it in each village. In urban areas, implementation is
undertaken by urban local bodies such as municipalities and corporations. Under the National Urban Health
Mission (NUHM), the Urban Community Health Centres (U-CHCs) and Urban PHCs are responsible for
implementation of the program. In the entomological zones, the zonal entomologists are responsible for
periodically monitoring and coordinating entomological surveillance and vector control activities.
Figure 1.2: Current LF burden

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Figure 1.3: LF programme leadership at various levels
Programmatic Steps for Elimination of LF
To eliminate LF the series of programmatic steps illustrated below in the figure 1.4 which depicts the
constituents and steps in Mass Drug Administration and Morbidity Management and Disability Prevention
that aims of stopping the spread of LF infection and alleviating suffering among people who have the disease
along with the Vector control activities to interrupt transmission.
Figure 1.4: Different constituents and steps of LF elimination programme

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

1.7 Committees (Institutional Mechanisms) for Implementation of ELF
Programme
The following are the different committees (institutional mechanisms) that are in place for the implementation
of Lymphatic Filariasis Programme at various levels.
-
National Technical Expert Committee (NTEC)
-
State level: State Task Force (STF) & State Technical Advisory Committee (STAC);
-
District level: District Coordination Committee (DCC) and District Task Force (DTF)
-
Block level: Block Coordination Committee (BCC) to steer and implement the LF Programme
The details of the Task Force/Coordination Committee meeting along with terms of reference are
mentioned in Annexure 1.
1.8 Progress of Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis in India (2004-2023)
The ELF has made considerable progress since its inception in the year 2004 with significant reduction in
the disease burden in 6 states/union territories namely Goa, Puducherry, Dadra &Nagar Haveli and Daman
& Diu, Tamil Nadu, Lakshadweep, Andaman & Nicobar Islands that have stopped MDA and a few states are
close to elimination status.
Figure 1.5: The key milestones in ELF programme

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Chapter-2
MAPPING OF LYMPHATIC FILARIASIS
-
Mapping is systematic epidemiological assessment of a geographical area to determine if a disease is
actively transmitted in the area.
-
Districts are classified as endemic districts (transmission present) and non-endemic districts
(transmission absent).
-
Non-endemic districts can be Confirmed or Uncertain
-
Confirmatory mapping methodology is used to determine the endemicity status of the uncertain
blocks of the district.
2.1 Introduction
The steps recommended by the WHO for elimination of LF begin with mapping. Mapping is the systematic
epidemiological assessment of all geographical areas to determine if a disease is actively transmitted in each
area. Mapping is done in uncertain districts to delineate the endemic areas for implementing intervention
measures. The mapping of uncertain areas should be completed at the earliest to plan and implement
intervention measures in a timely manner and eliminate LF from the country. Hence, mapping remains a high
priority for elimination of LF.
2.2 Implementation unit as the basis of sampling for delineation of LF
endemicity
The implementation unit (IU) should serve as the basic survey unit for mapping and delineating endemicity.
With the help of all available information, such as published data, unpublished survey data, distribution of
vectors and mapping survey data, all districts/blocks in the country should be classified as:
a. Endemic districts/blocks (transmission present): These endemic districts/blocks are already identified
under the programme and MDA is being implemented. Routine surveillance has also been established in
these blocks.
b. Non-endemic (transmission absent): Nonendemic districts can be Confirmed or Uncertain.
In certain districts, no MDA is required. These
are the districts/blocks where conditions like
weather and climate are not favorable for
sustaining mf circulation even if an individual
is infected with Mf. For example, districts in
Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh, Himachal Pradesh,
Punjab, Haryana, Uttarakhand, Delhi, Rajasthan,
Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Tripura,
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Manipur are considered
non-endemic due to ecological conditions
unfavorable for transmission of LF. However, if
Figure 2.1 LF endemicity mapping

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

states identify areas with cluster of cases (Lymphoedema and Hydrocele), then these areas can be assessed
for transmission status.
c. Non-Endemic (Uncertain) districts/blocks: As endemic countries move toward elimination, the
demonstration of lack of transmission in all areas, including low-endemic areas or gray areas, has become
increasingly important. The mapping approach generates more informative data about LF transmission,
particularly in low-endemic settings, and to be used as a tool to assess recent transmission to make the
decision of whether MDA is warranted.
Confirmatory mapping surveys using Night Blood Survey (NBS) or Filaria Test Strip (FTS) should be
conducted (based on the availability) to determine if there is ongoing transmission in uncertain blocks in
areas bordering endemic districts of endemic states, having migratory population or high burden of LF cases.
All such areas should classify the districts using the below methods. The summary is presented in figure 2.1.
2.3 LF mapping method
Mapping exercises are required only for uncertain districts. WHO has recommended a confirmatory mapping
methodology to determine the endemicity status of the blocks in the uncertain districts. Confirmatory mapping
should be undertaken to delineate the endemicity status of blocks in uncertain districts, including urban and
peri urban areas, to determine whether these areas require MDA. The uncertain districts or areas are those:
-
Baseline mapping of districts with unknown endemicity status.
-
Confirmation mapping of districts/blocks previously determined to be non-endemic or low endemic (less
than 1% Microfilaremia or less than 2% Antigenemia), but with suspicions of recent ongoing transmission.
-
Confirmation mapping of districts/blocks where previous mapping results were indeterminate.
2.3.1. Confirmatory mapping for LF with NBS
The Mf survey should include three sites (one sentinel and two random). In case the block /IU does not have
the details of chronic LF cases, then the selection of the sentinel site should be purposely done, considering
factors such as most difficult, remotest, hard-to-reach villages, or urban areas with water logging issues.
Additionally, in urban areas, consideration should be given to pockets with huge slums, migratory populations,
and poor socio-economic conditions.
From each site (random and sentinel), a sample size of 300 should be drawn (3 sites x 300) among the general
population aged 20 years and above, using systematic random sampling covering the households of that
village or site. The Mf rate will be calculated separately for each of the sentinel and random sites. For the block/
IU to be considered non-endemic, each site should report Mf rate of less than 1%.
If any of the three sites report an mf rate of more than 1%, the block will be considered endemic with pockets
of transmission and will be considered for inclusion in Mass Drug Administration. Since microfilariae exhibits
nocturnal periodicity, during Mf survey through NBS, the sample should be collected after 10.00 pm. The
NBS and preparations should be organized accordingly, with prior information provided to the communities
about the NBS.
2.3.2. Confirmatory mapping for LF with FTS
Survey Design and Sampling: A cluster survey design is used since cluster samples can include geographical
representation of the entire IU or block. A school survey design is preferred because it is logistically easier to
implement than community surveys and is representative of LF prevalence among the same age group in the
community.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

A school survey design using either systematic or cluster sampling has been developed by WHO, called Mini
Transmission Assessment Survey to assess evidence of recent LF transmission and determining when MDA
can stop.
In each IU, a certain number of schools should be randomly selected from a complete list of schools in the
block using equal probability sampling, in which every individual in the target population (children in class
4-8) has an equal chance of being selected for the survey. By doing this, the results generated from this survey
will produce an unbiased estimate of the prevalence of LF in this age group.
Step 1: Establish the sampling frame.
a. Determine the number of schools in the IU. Obtain a list of the schools and the estimated enrollment of
students in class 4-8th standard (equivalent school class attended by children 9 to 14 years of age) at each
school.
b. Sort the list of schools by geographical distribution in the IU.
Step 2. Design the sampling method: Cluster Sampling.
a. The block/IU should have a minimum of 40 schools to conduct cluster sampling. 30 schools (aka “clusters”)
should be selected from the total number of schools in the district and a predetermined fraction of students
should be selected from each cluster.
b. Select the 30 schools using a method called ‘probability proportional to estimated size’ that ensures the
probability of a school being selected into the survey is proportionate to how large the school is (e.g.,
schools with many students are more likely to be selected into the survey than schools with few students).
c. On average, 16 students will be selected from each of the 30 schools (leading to a total sample size of
approximately 480). Calculate the sampling fraction for each school as follows: (sample size) / (school
population in target classes). For example, if a school has 128 students in classes 4-8, then the sampling
fraction would be 16/128 = 0.125, meaning that 1 out of every 8 students will be selected into the survey
from that school (on average this should result in a sample of 16 students).
Note: When there are fewer than 40 schools in a block, please contact the NCVBDC for guidance on
implementing systematic sampling methodology.
Step 3. Select students for the survey.
a. Visit only selected schools and use the sampling fraction specific to the selected school. Example: If the
sampling fraction is 0.125 as mentioned above, then select every 8th student for testing. When visiting the
next school, determine the sampling fraction for that school and select every Nth student.
b. Counting of students and selection can be done in the classroom or assembly.
Field Data Collection: All data collection will take place at the school site and should be conducted by trained
teams with one laboratory technician and one data recorder. In each school, selected children will be tested for
circulating filarial antigen using FTS in IUs suspected of W. bancrofti endemicity and for anti-filarial antibody
using the Brugia Rapid Test in IUs where Brugia is suspected. Whole blood will be collected directly from the
finger using a lancet and capillary tube then applied to the sample pad of the point-of-care rapid diagnostic
tests. Testing will continue until all selected children have been tested, regardless of the number of positives
found.
Interpretation and Decision: This survey is designed to estimate, with known probabilities of error, whether
the average prevalence of LF infection among older school children in each targeted district is below or at/
above a threshold of 2.0%. To assess if the threshold is reached, a critical cut-off value of positive children

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

has been established. If the number of antigen-positive children is at or below the critical cut-off, then the
population prevalence is assumed to below the threshold i.e. ≤3 children for cluster surveys (see table below).
Additionally, the survey also provides an estimate of LF infection prevalence in each IU-level sample of
children 10-14 years of age.
The critical cut-off value and the sample size were chosen so that if the true antigen prevalence is ≥ 2%, the
maximum chance of incorrectly passing an IU (i.e., no MDA needed) is 6% (alpha error), given that the
design-effect assumption (1.5) is accurate. Using this threshold, areas with a true prevalence of 1% will fail (i.e.,
require MDA) more than half the time (40% power).
IUs with more than 3 positive children in cluster surveys are considered to require MDA. However, even if
there are 1 or 2 positive children, local response must be initiated by treating the positives and conducting
vector surveillance activities in that area.
Table 2.1 Critical Cutoff values for decision making by target population size.
Size of target population in the
implementation unit
Cluster Sampling
Critical Cutoff*
Sample Size
0-749
NA
NA
750-999
NA
NA
1000-1999

≥2000

*If the total number of positive tests is less than or equal to this critical cutoff then the prevalence in the IU is likely <2% and
MDA is not required.
Treatment of Mf and Ag positives
All Mf positive cases confirmed by NBS or FTS test would be treated with Directly Observed Single dose of DA
or IDA as per the MDA regimen followed by the standard 12 days treatment with DEC of dosage 6mg/Kg body
weight for 12 days daily to be consumed after the meal. Each positive case should be followed up for a period
of two years to prevent any chronic manifestations later. NBS of all the Mf positive cases need to be repeated
every 6 months till the time the individual is negative for Mf.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Chapter-3
ENHANCED FIVE-PRONGED STRATEGY FOR
ELIMINATION OF LYMPHATIC FILARIASIS
-
The LF programme has historically followed two-pronged strategy for elimination of LF.
-
India adopted enhanced five-pronged strategy which was launched by Hon’ble HFM in January 2023.
-
Focus on Mission mode MDA, early case detection and MMDP services by engaging Medical Colleges,
Vector Control, intersectoral coordination and digital platforms for LF reporting.
3.1 Introduction
In the past five years, 40% of the endemic districts in India have ceased Mass Drug Administration (MDA)
and continue to report community Microfilaria (Mf) rates below 1%. To accelerate the ongoing efforts and
achieve elimination of the disease before 2030, India adopted enhanced strategy for accelerated interventions.
The projected timeline demonstrates that steady progress is possible if the enhanced intervention plan is
implemented, with all districts stopping MDA.
NCVBDC adopted new strategies that are aligned to bring about the following systemic changes, including:
-
Heightened ownership and commitment at national level
and by endemic states & UTs towards improved planning
and implementation of MDA campaign.
-
Enhanced focus on vector management and surveillance
through a multisectoral approach targeted to improve
environmental factors (including improved sanitation etc.)
that address mosquito breeding.
-
Addressing gaps including emergence of new LF endemic
districts after mapping of uncertain districts & reestablishment of transmission in areas cleared TAS 3 due to
migration.
3.2 Enhanced Strategies for Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis
1. Mission mode Annual MDA (Mass
Drug Administration):
Efforts to improve drugs compliance with
Directly Observed Consumption (DOC)
with target aiming >90% coverage against the
eligible population.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Annual MDA Campaign in Mission Mode: A major policy shift in conducting MDAs campaign in two
phases once a year in endemic districts that are synchronized with National Deworming Days (NDD) on
February 10 and August 10. The objective is to bring unprecedented focus and synergy to the programme and
mass visibility to improve community compliance to MDA drugs.
Key aspects:
-
High-level MDA reviews conducted by the Chief/Principal Secretary at the state level, Commissioners at
the division level, District Magistrates (DMs) or District Collectors (DCs) at the district level, and Block
Development Officers (BDOs) along with Medical Officers at the block level.
-
States are provided with 3 months of preparation before the MDA is to begin.
-
Targeted MDA for urban areas with accountable human resources through outsourcing, comprehensive
micro plans covering high-risk groups, migratory population, and workplaces, engagement of NSS and
CHOs of Ayushman Arogya Mandir. Mobile Booth for transit points and static booths at health facilities,
medical colleges, marketplaces, offices, institutes, schools, Anganwadi centers etc.
-
Utilizing Rastriya Bal Suraksha Karyakram (RBSK) human resources during MDA rounds.
-
Strengthening lab capacity and systems for enhanced surveillance and quality assurance.
-
Ensuring an adequate supply of drugs and diagnostic’s considering increased requirements for scale up
along with improved drugs and logistics management.
2. Morbidity Management and Disability Prevention (MMDP)
Clearing the backlog of hydrocele surgeries for all eligible patients to achieve zero pendency of hydrocele
operations and 100% MMDP Kits distribution.
Leveraging the provisions under the PMJAY
scheme under Ayushman Bharat to clear backlogs.
Ensuring updated line lists of lymphoedema and
hydrocele cases in all PHCs, blocks, districts, and
states. Ensuring early diagnosis and treatment of
LF cases across all levels to prevent progression to
chronic disability. Ensuring the provision of social
security benefits under schemes of the Government of India and state governments for the social inclusion of
LF patients. Uploading the line list of cases to the Integrated Health and Information Platform (IHIP) portal.
Medical College Engagement
To address the challenges and to enhance access to quality services in LF, Medical Colleges can play a vital role
in accelerating the elimination goal. Medical Colleges, through their academic, research and service-delivery
facilities offer an untapped opportunity to provide quality care in the LF Elimination programme with their
expertise and experience. The following are the roles that Medical Colleges can play.
1. Service Delivery
-
Early Diagnosis and treatment for LF cases.
-
Treatment for episodes of adenolymphangitis (ADL) or acute attacks.
-
Surgery for hydrocoele patients and management of lymphoedema patients with clinical, surgical, and
psychosocial interventions.
-
Monitoring support during MDA campaigns.
2. Capacity building
-
Act as nodal training centres for providing quality trainings to district and sub district level service
providers.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Training on proper collection of blood smears and microscopy examination procedure by lab
technicians for Mf survey and quality assurance for the collected slides.
-
Creating a pool of master trainers amongst the faculty of various departments for LF.
3. LF Program management
-
Dissemination of program guidelines and policy framework to the medical students.
-
Engaging faculty and postgraduate students of community medicine and microbiology departments
in taking up research activities.
-
Proactively engage in and contribute in LF State Technical Advisory Committee meetings.
4. Monitoring, Learning and Evaluation
-
Conduct Coverage Evaluation Surveys and engage in other monitoring activities such as MDA, NBS,
etc. as per need.
-
Data management, analytics, and reporting on government portals such as IHIP etc.
-
Conduct academic and operational research for evidence-based actions.
-
Organize conferences or meetings to disseminate the learnings and to disseminate operational research
work with professional bodies and other institutes on a regular basis.
3. Vector Control (Surveillance & Management)
Strengthening
entomological
surveillance
for lymphatic filariasis. Implementing source
reduction of the vector and ensuring the
availability and capacity of human resources for
vector surveillance and control.
In addition to vector control, intersectoral
coordination is crucial for integrated vector
control. This involves collaboration between
different departments, such as health, education,
and sanitation, to address the social and environmental factors that contribute to the transmission of LF. For
example, improving access to clean water and sanitation facilities can reduce the breeding sites for mosquitoes
and decrease the risk of LF transmission.
4. High Level Advocacy:
Engaging existing platforms such as Education,
Civil Supply, State Rural Livelihood Mission,
Panchayat Raj Institutions, Tribal Affairs, WCD,
Youth Affairs, etc., in generating demand for
MDA in the community through high-level
engagement of the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare and NITI Aayog for intersectoral
convergence.
Political and Administrative engagement:
-
Sensitize political leaders so that they publicly support pre-defined outcomes under ELF to build an
enabling environment for success.
-
High Level National, State & District reviews for MDA, MMDP.
-
National/State/District Task force on LF led by Secretary Health, ACS/Secretary Health and DM/DC/
Municipal Commissioner respectively.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

5. Innovative Approaches
-
Faster adoption of newer diagnostics and
patient management approaches in LF
programme.
-
Explore alternative tests for current FTS or
Mf detection tools used for stopping MDA
decision and surveillance.
-
DEC Medicated Salt as an adjunct to Mass
Drug Administration.
-
Availability of high-end quality data and data
analytics for informed decision making through the LF modules on IHIP portal that would generate:
o
Interactive dashboard
o
Digital Line listing of LF patients and Mf positives.
o
Real Time Reporting - Disaggregated data on MDA coverage
o
Surveillance data – Mf survey and TAS

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Chapter-4
MASS DRUG ADMINISTRATION
-
Mass Drug Administration (MDA) is one of the key strategies aimed to interrupt transmission of LF
in endemic districts.
-
IDA implementation was initiated in 2018 under the APELF and subsequently scaled up to other
districts.
-
For DA campaigns, annual MDA for at least 5 years and IDA for at least 2 years with an effective
coverage among eligible population of more than 90% is recommended.
-
In the urban areas that are selected for MDA, the involvement and ownership of urban PHCs under
NUHM needs to be ensured, the MDA will be planned in alignment to the NUHM structures i.e.
Urban PHC, Urban CHC, Medical Colleges, Nagar Parishads, Municipal Commissioners, ANM,
Urban ASHA, MAS etc.
4.1: Introduction
Transmission interruption is one of the key strategies for LF elimination program. A single dose of anti-filarial
drugs exerts profound microfilaricidal effect. The first round of MDA reduces the community microfilaremia
prevalence and intensity appreciably, resulting in a reduction in LF transmission. The subsequent rounds
of MDA further diminish community microfilaremia and transmission, resulting in zero or scant new
infections, over a 5-6-year period. MDA also kills a significant proportion of the adult worm population,
and the remaining worms move to fecund life span (5-6 years), leading to existence of no reproductively
active adult worms and production of new generation of microfilariae. Therefore, implementing successful
and effective annual MDA for a minimum of 5 to 6 years for DA or conducting two to three effective MDA
rounds for IDA decreases Mf prevalence and intensity, interrupts transmission, and forms the central strategy
of LF elimination programmes.
Mass Drug Administration is a method of administering preventive chemotherapy in which medicines are
administered to the eligible population of an area endemic with Mf rate >1 at regular intervals, regardless of
individual infection status with an objective to bring down LF infection prevalence to below the threshold
level over a defined period so that it ceases to be a public health problem.
The annual dose is to be repeated every year for a period of 5-6 years for DA and 2-3 years for IDA aiming
at more than 90 % of drug compliance against the eligible population. It must be ensured that all seasonal
migrant workers in the endemic areas/blocks should be covered during MDA round.
Administering drug to every eligible individual requires active participation of community members and all
other relevant stakeholders. For optimal MDA coverage and compliance, strong pre-MDA preparedness with
engagement of health and non-health departments is required. Following are the key components of the Mass
Drug Administration as depicted in Figure 4.1

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

4.2 Pre MDA
4.2.1 Determining Population at Risk, Total and Target Population.
At the very onset of the programme, it’s critical that the programme managers determine the population in the
blocks/Implementation Units (IUs), state and overall, who are at risk of the disease as well as determine the
total population and the eligible population to be covered under the programme. Once an IU has been defined
as endemic for LF, the total population in that IU is at risk. The total population is sourced from the latest
available Census of India or based on the decadal growth rate or government programme data whichever is the
latest. For calculating the ineligible population for the LF programme, determine the population of pregnant
women, children below 2 years of age and those people who may be severely ill. To calculate target population,
the ineligible population needs to be deducted from the total population, which usually ranges between 5-15%
of the total estimated population.
4.2.2 Target Areas and Population
In each district, to accelerate the progress for achieving the goal of elimination, the block level implementation
strategy for MDA is considered. IU is defined as block in each endemic district. In the urban areas, the UPHC
or Municipal area, slums to be considered as separate IU. The target population for MDA includes the entire
eligible population of the endemic blocks/IUs or the urban areas with Mf rate > 1. From a safety perspective,
the following categories of population groups are excluded from MDA as per below table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Population groups to be excluded for MDA
Figure 4.1: Key components of Mass Drug Administration
For DA
For IDA
-
Children <2-year age
-
Pregnant women
-
Seriously ill people*.
-
Ivermectin should not be administered to Children <5-year age or <90 cm tall.
-
Pregnant women.
-
Breast-feeding mothers within one week of birth.
-
Individuals with active serious illness *of an acute or chronic nature
Seriously ill patients may be considered as those who are bedridden with terminal illness such as cancer, kidney failure, liver
failure etc.
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Patients on any medications such as uncomplicated hypertension, diabetes, TB etc are not contraindicated for
consumption of MDA drugs. Individuals > 65 years and breastfeeding mothers beyond one week should also
consume MDA drugs.
4.2.3 Drug Requirements, Logistics, Drug Movement
Logistics is the process of estimating, procuring, supplying drugs to administration points, and maintaining
inventory of logistics, so that the effective and efficient flow of goods and services from the point of origin
to the point of consumption is achieved. The drug requirement for the programme is calculated for each
block /IU based on population size, derived from Census and existing stock balance. The current year’s drug
requirement is calculated by subtracting the remaining balance of drugs (DEC, Albendazole, and Ivermectin)
from the previous year’s supply.
Medical Officers of PHCs/CHCs/UHCs and Health Officers of municipalities prepare the requirements of
drugs and submit those to the district level officers who in turn submit to the State Programme Officer (SPO).
For Urban areas, Medical Officers of UHCs/HWC and Health Officers of municipalities will prepare the
requirements of drugs and submit to the district level officers who in turn submit to SPO. The request for
drugs for the current year should be submitted via the SPO and conveyed to NCVBDC. The state must receive
the drugs at least three months prior to the scheduled MDA date. The drug requirement is calculated as given
below in Table 4.2.
Table 4.2: Drug requirement calculation
Drug requirement calculation
DEC (100 mg) required for IU
Eligible population of IU x 2.5
ALB (400 mg) required for IU
Eligible population of IU x 1
IVR (3 mg) required for IU
Eligible population of IU x 2.5
General drugs for managing adverse drug reactions: During the MDA programme, a proportion of the
population that undergoes treatment may develop drug reactions. Most of these drug reactions are self-
limiting and may subside without any treatment. Yet, some people with fever or nausea may require treatment
with common drugs. Hence drugs such as paracetamol, ORS and some antihistamines may be readily available
for Rapid Response Teams (RRT).
Drug Movement: Drug movement must be meticulously planned with a timeline of one month from the state
headquarter to district headquarters, two weeks from district to Block/PHC before the MDA and 7-10 days
from Block/PHC to villages where the drugs are administered by the Drug Administrators (DA) to ensure
smooth operations. PHCs/CHCs are responsible for secure storage of drugs and subsequent transportation to
villages.
Storage and Inventory of drugs: MDA drugs must be stored in designated areas at optimal temperatures,
adhering to expiry dates with a first in, first out (FIFO) approach to prevent wastage. Continuous inventory
monitoring throughout procurement, administration, and expiration is crucial to minimize waste. Damaged or
expired drugs should be promptly disposed of following biomedical waste guidelines to prevent any potential
misuse. It is the responsibility of the state administration to randomly check the samples of the drugs received
prior to MDA and promptly inform the NCVBDC with details of the batch number, manufacturer name and
expiry dates in case of any quality issues noticed with the drugs.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Supply of information, Education and Communication material (To be procured at least 2 months before
MDA): Education materials like posters, pamphlets, and banners are procured in advance for MDA programs.
These materials are distributed to PHCs/SCs for dissemination to health workers/DAs in villages and urban
wards. States should use prototypes provided by the National Programme to print IEC materials, ensuring
quality standards are maintained nationwide.
4.2.4 Identification of Drug Administrators, Supervisors and Trainings
Identification of Drug Administrators (DA): (To be recruited and have the lists ready 4-6 weeks before
MDA): The identification and training of DAs in adequate numbers from within the community in each
village/urban ward is an important activity in MDA. The Medical Officer in charge of the block will decide
and include the names of the drug administrator in the micro-plan. Based on the total workload (e.g., the total
number of houses to be covered during MDA), the medical officer in charge will also calculate and decide the
total number of teams/ drug administrators in the entire block.
The Drug Administrators could be:
Rural area: ASHA worker/ Anganwadi worker/ Community Volunteer/ Teacher/ Social worker.
Urban area: Urban ASHA / Anganwadi worker/ Community Volunteer/ Social worker/ SHG members/
Nursing students/Mahila Arogya Samiti Members/NSS/NCC cadets etc.
Since these workers are local and have the confidence of the community. Support can also be sought from
DUDA/Civil defense /NCC/NYK/NSS cadets and urban local bodies/corporation & PRI members. Usually, a
team of two drug administrators (DAs) will complete drug administration in a well-defined area. If adequate
manpower is not available, it is recommended to prolong activity with selected good DAs (Up to 15-20 days)
rather than completing it early with unaccountable manpower.
ASHA is usually deployed at a population of 1000 (200 households) per area, and she must ensure drug
compliance in all eligible population of her area. In areas where ASHAs are not available, other frontline
workers such as AWW, SHG worker, Shiksha Mitra etc can be deployed as per the population norms as Drug
Administrators.
The Drug Administrator Team should cover the entire catchment area and enlist support for the MDA in
consultation with PRI members and other opinion leaders. The honorarium, as per national guideline, is not
as per days of activity but rather to cover people i.e. INR 600 per Drug Administrator to cover 50 Houses/250
population. To ensure quality of reach and directly observed consumption, each DA team should not cover
more than 25 houses per day. The honorarium needs to be calculated as per national norms of INR 600
for 250 population/50 houses. The goal of the DA is to give the correct MDA dose under his/her direct
observation and in no circumstance hand over or distribute drugs to the household members.
Formation of Teams: A two-member DA team per area needs to be formed. Since MDA campaign involves
House to House administration of drugs and other related work such as filling registers, house marking, finger
marking and line listing of LF cases, The first member should administer the drug to beneficiaries and do finger
marking. The second member should be responsible for updating the family register and house marking. They
should work in cohesion and build a positive environment for drug administration activity in the rural and
urban communities. For each village/urban area, a day wise detailed micro plan should be prepared by the DA
team and submitted to PHC/UPHC. The DAs are supported by the heath supervisors.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Drug Administrator Supervisor: Each DA supervisor ideally need to cover 5 teams, and he/she is responsible
to monitor the allocated teams and ensure that the teams are working as per the submitted micro plan and DA
teams are administrating the drugs in the community and ensuring Directly Observed Consumption (DOC).
The responsibilities of DAs and Supervisors are mentioned in chapter 12 (12.3 section).
Training: Training is an important component of the MDA programmes, conducted prior to the MDA
round. Training should focus on the skills required to administer the drug in the community and provide
information about the drugs, house and finger marking, documenting the family registers, side effects and any
other concerns raised by the community for ensuring effective coverage and compliance to anti filarial drugs.
Although most of the health staff and
DAs are involved in the programme every
year, the training should be conducted
prior to each MDA programme for
district medical officers, PHC medical
officers, supervisory staff, and health
workers/DAs. The DA trainings need
to be conducted at sector level or at the
PHC/CHC by the trained MoIC and his
team. The trainings need to be mentored
by the District level officers and partners. Training should follow a cascade system as depicted in figure 4.2.
The training should be conducted through lectures, interactive sessions, and role play. All efforts should
be made to optimally utilize Audio Visual (AV) training aids during training. In absence of adequate AV
infrastructure facility, digital platforms such as WhatsApp, YouTube may be utilized on mobile devices. The
PHC medical officer and senior staff, who mostly act as trainers, should actively participate in the training
throughout.
The Medical Officer In charge (MOIC) or the trainer should emphasize the need for MDA rounds, roles and
responsibilities, documentation of registers/reports and discuss the previous year’s performance/ problems
during MDA, particularly lower coverage in certain areas, and discuss remedial measures for the problems
encountered. In Urban areas, initially urban and municipal health officers would be trained at city level by the
master trainers who would have received training at the state level. One training batch should ideally consist
of 30 members and should not have more than forty participants and these trainings need to be monitored by
senior officers and external monitors to ensure quality.
The training program should include imparting supervisory skills to supervisory staff. The supervisory staff
and medical officer need to support the DA teams during the MDA campaign. A separate additional
orientation needs to be conducted for DA team supervisors focusing on skills, monitoring checklist and
support to be provided to DA teams.
The block medical officer/UHC/Municipal health officer in charge is responsible for planning the trainings of
DAs as follows:
-
Prepare the training schedule for DAs and supervisors.
-
Communicate the training dates with the supervisors and DAs.
-
Arrange the supplies and logistics (handouts, tally sheets, drugs, registers, dose poles, indelible markers,
projector) required for trainings.
-
Training material and aids such as audio visuals, flip book etc.
Figure 4.2: Training levels

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

The following table 4.3 presents the training details for various cadresS No
Trainees/ Participants
and Duration
Trainers/ facilitators
Topics
1.
District VBDOs and
PHC medical officer’s /
Deputy Civil Surgeons/
Municipal Health
Officer/MO PHC/
DCPM/RBSK MOs
Duration: One day
District level programme
officers supported by the
state level programme
officer, officers from
regional office for Health
& FW, GOI, WHO
consultants, and faculty
from medical colleges
Burden and epidemiology of LF, ELF programme,
MDA implementation, importance of ensuring DOC,
micro plans, drug requirements, adverse events
and management, enumeration, house and finger
marking, logistics, IEC materials, line listing LF cases,
social mobilization, Supervision, Data recording, data
flow and entries in IHIP.
2.
Training	of Paramedical
Staff/CHOs/ASHA
facilitators at PHC /
Municipal Level
Duration: One day
Medical officers of
PHCs, Municipal Health
Officers, BCPM, MIs etc
Focusing on elimination of the LF disease - Causative
organism, Transmission cycle, Clinical features,
Drugs used for MDA and administration, house and
finger marking, Dosage details, criteria of dosages,
importance of DOC, Adverse events, referral and
reporting , MDA activities – pre, during and post,
cross checking ,line listing of LF cases, follow ups,
mopping and treatment coverage (compliance
to ingestion of drugs through DOC) , IEC and
key messages, Dealing with resisting community
members, Incentives, MDA reporting register/formats
and IHIP data entry
3.
Training of DAs
Duration: One day
Medical Officers and
Supervisors
ELF, rationale for MDA, approaches for drug
administration, logistics required for MDA, drugs
dosages and administration, importance of DOC,
marking of houses, finger marking, adverse events,
referral and reporting, microplanning, family
registers, cross checking, line listing of LF cases,
follow ups, mopping and treatment coverage,
FAQ, IEC and key messages, dealing with refusals,
Incentives, MDA reporting formats and dataflow
4.2.5 Enumeration
Time frame: To be conducted 2 months- 2 1⁄2 months before the MDA.
Enumeration of households and population is crucial for planning, implementing, and reporting the MDA
activities. The enumeration data should be made available for each village/urban ward/community before
the MDA programme date. This data is compiled for each family through house-to-house visits by the DA
teams of the respective PHC/HSC or urban primary health center (UPHC). Family registers should be used
to record the household data, all members of the family including children should be registered and the first
name should be that of the head of the family followed by each family member the details need to be entered
in different rows.
Care should be taken so that no household is missed in the community during the enumeration process. The
family register is updated every year, and this should ideally be done before the MDA round.
-
Family members who are permanently away from home due to work should be excluded from the list
of eligible population for the MDA.
-
All migratory populations arriving from LF-endemic areas should be administered MDA Drugs
during MDA.
-
All guests present in the house during the visit of the DA team should be administered anti- filarial
drugs.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

For recording details of suspected lymphoedema and hydrocele cases during the enumeration or during MDA
along with filling of family register, it needs be filled by the concerned DAs.
The detailed family register format has been included in Annexure 2
4.2.6 Micro Planning
Time frame: To be completed at least 1 to 1 1⁄2 months before MDA.
Annual microplanning is an essential prerequisite for MDA. The purpose of the micro plan is to have a clear
understanding of all the activities and the number of houses to be covered on a particular day by DAs. Microplanning should ideally be done at least one month before the MDA round. The person in-charge preparing
the micro-plan should have practical knowledge of the number of houses, important landmarks, influential
people in that area and the number of people residing there.
Microplanning of the urban area should be done based on urban wards, already demarcated in the cities/
towns. All the houses, and every member of the household needs to be enumerated in the family register/
enumeration list, so that the data related to every household of each ward is readily available with the
programme for the planning purposes. The identification of the vulnerable areas must be evidence-based, and
it should be ensured by the district VBD/programme officer to avoid missed areas. It would be better to also
clearly map the areas which are not to be included in the MDA.
Ideally, microplanning should be done after the enumeration is completed. The enumeration should be
completed at least two to three weeks before the start of the MDA campaign. The micro- plan is the blueprint
that ensures that correct drugs and logistics are available in the right quantities, in the right places, and at
the right time. The medical officer in charge will convene a meeting at the block/urban level in which all the
supervisors, ANMs, ASHAs and AWW workers, Volunteers jointly develop micro plans of their respective
areas. The Supervisors will submit their DA team micro plans to their MOICs, and all the micro plans will
further be submitted to District VBD officer or concerned district officials. The detailed micro plan template
has been included in Annexure 3
Example: hand drawn ward map from micro -plan with
team-day areas (5 Teams)
Maps: A local area field-map of each rural/urban ward
under every planning unit must be prepared as a reference
for planning day wise field activity including both booth
and house to house visits during MDA. It is preferable
to use the existing maps prepared for other national
programmes such as non-communicable diseases
screening, polio etc. Otherwise, a hand drawn simple map
should include the planning unit, main roads, by-lanes,
basic household cluster-locations, important landmarks,
booth/drug sub-depot’s locations, including each area /
ward boundaries. These maps should be prepared for each
team and supervisory areas by the respective trained DAs
under guidance from their supervisors. This mapping
exercise can be undertaken simultaneously while visiting
the urban wards for family survey through field validation
on the ground by the DAs.
Following aspects need to be ensured for micro-plans:
-
No geographical area (in villages and in urban wards) should be missed.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

All hamlets (tolas/ purwas) adjoining the village, peri urban areas, unauthorized slums, all residential
schools, brick kilns, construction sites, industrial areas, nomadic sites, should be incorporated.
-
Blocks or urban municipalities should be divided into small areas (villages or wards). Against the name of
the drug administrators, population to be covered, contact details of drug administrators, contact details
of RRT (Rapid Response Team), dates of (visits) operation and name of supervisor.
-
Separate micro-plans need to be prepared for Booth and House to House activity. The medical officer of
the urban PHC would be accountable for the preparation of the micro-plan of his PHC area.
-
Micro-plans should indicate the day wise house numbers/number of houses to be covered or locality so
that the supervisor is aware of the location of the drug administrators on a particular day.
-
It should include the name of the first & last household owner for each day of activity with identifiable
landmarks in the village or locality.
-
Names of prominent local persons like Pradhan, panchayat members, local doctors, teachers, religious
& political leaders, etc. should be incorporated, so that their help can be taken for ensuring better
consumption.
-
Drug Administrators will be supported by concerned supervisors/sector supervisors for preparation of
micro-plans for the booth and house to house activity of their assigned areas.
Micro plan review: Once the micro plans are prepared, the respective Block Programme Manager (BPM)
should review all the components of the micro plan and thoroughly check to ensure all aspects in the format
are documented. Then micro plans need to be approved by MOIC. A copy of the micro plan (soft or hard)
must be sent to the Civil Surgeon/CMO/CDMO/DVBDCO two weeks prior to the start of the MDA activity.
MDA Action Plan: The Block/PHC wise data is required for effective implementation of MDA. The relevant
details are to be captured in the action plan such as total population of the block, number of villages, SC/
PHC/UPHC, details of the booths identified with location and DA names, total number of DA teams and
supervisors with details, details of the dates for house to house, booth approach, DA and Supervisor incentives,
logistics i.e. Forms/Pens/Posters/Pamphlets/Drug Administration instructions/ dose pole/ markers/Registers
handouts required and IEC and social mobilization plan.
4.2.7 Social Mobilization and Advocacy
The social mobilisation and advocacy plan should be developed three months prior to the MDA at the state,
district, and block levels. The detailed guidance is provided in chapter 8.
4.2.8 Micro Filaria Survey at Block/IU level
The Microfilaria survey is conducted annually for assessment of the level of the infection persisting among
the human population. Since the implementation unit is block, the assessment for impact of MDA campaign
would be conducted at the block level.
Night Blood Survey (NBS) is required to identify endemicity of the area and to document impact of MDA. The
decision on whether to continue annual rounds of MDA will depend on the Mf results. Laboratory confirmation
of diagnosis is necessary to identify asymptomatic patients and those with non-specific symptoms.
The NBS for microfilaria, should be conducted after 6 months after the completion of the last MDA round
for DA (double drug) and after 9 months for IDA round (triple drug) to allow microfilaria levels to rebound
from drug pressure and it should be completed 1 month before the current MDA campaign. Since microfilaria
exhibits nocturnal periodicity, the sample should be collected after 10.00 pm. The NBS camp and preparations
should be held accordingly with prior information to the communities about the NBS.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Selection of surveillance sites: Before the first round of MDA is implemented in any newly mapped block/
Implementation Unit, one sentinel site and one spot check /random site for that implementation unit (IU) need
to be identified. These sites will be used to ascertain the baseline parasitological indicators. These surveillance
sites are to be identified based on the high disease prevalence rate.
The steps to be followed for the selection of a Sentinel site or fixed sites is as follows:
-
Make a list of all Health Sub Centers (HSC) in the block/IU.
-
Select one HSC with the highest number of lymphoedema and hydrocele cases detected during the
morbidity survey/line listing most recently conducted.
-
From the selected HSC, select one village with the highest number of lymphoedema and hydrocele cases
thus giving the surveillance site from the rural area.
-
In case, if the block IU does not have the mapping of chronic LF cases, the selection of site would be a
purposive selection. Villages with these aspects could be considered like most difficult or remotest village,
poor socio-economic conditions, hard-to-reach areas, maximum refusals or where compliance was poor/
doubtful in previous rounds.
-
For the urban areas, select one ward with the highest number of lymphoedema and hydrocele cases from
the selected municipality/urban areas for MDA. If the data is not available, then consider the ward having
the history of LF cases.
The sentinel/fixed sites which remain fixed for as long as MDA is implemented.
For Spot check/random sites, one site is selected randomly by making the list of all subcenters in the block
and selecting one Health Sub Centre and then from the village list of that Sub Centre, select one village as site.
In urban areas, select one ward randomly. The village or ward selected randomly are spot check/Random site,
which is to be changed every year following the above method.
Note: From 2026-27 onwards, each block/IU will have 3 sites (one sentinel and two random sites). The site
selection criteria will remain the same.
Sample Size for each site
To increase the sensitivity and ability to detect ongoing transmission, the survey will focus on Mf in adults
(individuals 20 years of age and older). Adults are chosen as the target population because they have a higher
prevalence of Mf than children. Some studies have demonstrated infections and ongoing transmission among
adults when infection in children is below threshold.
The survey population should be that of the Implementation Unit. All members of the population of the site
should be included, or, where the population is too large, a part of the site can be chosen. In rural areas, the
village of the block can be chosen, whereas in cities or towns, a small community or segment of municipality or
wards or the slum can be chosen. All adults (≥20 years) who live in the area are eligible to be tested. Pregnant
and lactating women should not be excluded from the assessment.
If the population of adults in the selected site is less than 400 then every adult should be tested (census).
Random sampling of adults in the selected sentinel and spot-check site is recommended for sites where the
site population of adults is greater than 400. When random sampling is used, an estimate of prevalence can be
generated. This is better than a convenience sample in that it can eliminate types of sampling bias which could
lead to an incorrect decision of whether criteria has been met. The following methods can be used for random
selection of adults:

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Systematic sampling of households. A unique sampling interval is calculated for the community. Using a
household listing or numbering of households, teams pick a random starting number between 0 and the
sampling interval and then add the sampling interval repeatedly to the random starting number to generate
the list of HHs that should be selected. All adults in each selected household should be tested.
HH sampling interval for selection of persons for NBS = (n’) * (1-r) / (q)
where, n’ = estimated population of adults in the site ; r = the expected non-response rate and q = desired sample
size per site
Segmentation: The community is split roughly into equal segments of 100 households and 2 or 3 segments are
randomly selected (the number of segments to select will depend on the number of households necessary to
reach the target sample size of adults). All households in the selected segment are visited and all adults in each
household are eligible for testing. If random sampling cannot be used, it is most important to ensure i) equal
geographic representation of the site in the sample and ii) groups at highest risk are included in the sample.
A sample of 300 people aged 20 years and above is to be drawn from each site for the microfilariae survey
(300*2 sites). Selection of 300 people per site for night blood survey (NBS) is to be systematically randomized
so that entire site is represented. In the case of villages/ urban areas of smaller size where enough samples may
not be available, the required sample can be completed from adjoining villages/ urban areas of the same block/
IU.
For quality check purposes, all positive slides should be sent to the office of the Regional Director of ROH&FW
for cross checking. 10% of the negative slides should be sent to the state level laboratory, which will send
2% of these slides to the office of the Regional Director of ROH&FW and examine the remaining 8%. Any
discrepancies noticed during cross checking by the RD office or state labs needs to be shared with NCVBDC.
The states need to ensure periodic reorientation of Lab Technicians. (LTs.)
Further, for quality assurance purpose, few slides including postive, negative, false positve and false negative
to be send to National Reference Laboratory, NCVBDC, Delhi for cross checking.
4.2.9 Pre-TAS
The following criteria should be met before taking the decision to stop MDA and proceeding for pre- TAS:
-
At least 5 rounds of MDA for DA and 2 rounds for IDA have been completed in the respective IU (block)
-
The minimum consumption of MDA drugs must be more than 90 percent for DA and IDA against the
eligible population.
-
The last Mf survey must have reported <1% mf rate or <2% Antigenemia in each identified surveillance
site(s) in the block / urban area.
The pre-TAS needs to be initiated immediately among the eligible blocks/IUs as per criteria. For pre-TAS
three additional sites are to be selected per IU (block) following these steps:
-
Two sites to be selected from the 2 most difficult or remotest villages in a block. The criteria for the
selection could include poor socio-economic conditions, hard to reach areas, villages with lymphoedema
and hydrocele cases, maximum refusals or where coverage and compliance was poor/ doubtful in previous
rounds of MDA.
-
One site is to be selected randomly from the list of total villages in the respective block.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

The sample size for each site is 300 and Target population is the general population aged 20 years and
above and randomized sampling should be followed for the selection of this population for ensuring
representation from the entire site.
-
For DA IUs, Night Blood Survey (NBS) should be conducted.
-
For IDA implementation units, FTS will be utilized initially, followed by NBS for all FTS-positive cases.
A total sample of 900 would be drawn from 3 sites. In absence of sufficient WHO-recommended RDT,
night blood survey might be used for decision making in Epidemiological Monitoring Survey (EMS),
provided that the programme ensure the quality of night blood survey as par global standards.
-
While selecting these 3 sites for pre-TAS, exclude the sites (sentinel and random) that were included
in NBS (Mf Survey)
The Mf rate is calculated by taking the total positive cases from NBS and total persons tested. The formula
would be as follows:
For DA IUs: Each site Mf rate % = Total +ve cases from NBS/Total persons tested (300) *100 and calculate for
all three sites and if any one site reports >1 Mf rate then it will continue MDA.
For IDA IUs: Pre-TAS or epidemiological monitoring survey (EMS) is conducted using FTS among 300
persons aged 20 and above for Ag for each site and all FTS +ve are to be tested by NBS for Mf and subsequently
Mf rate is calculated:
Mf rate%= Total +ve cases from NBS/ Total persons tested with FTS (excluding invalid tests) * 100
If an IU fails Pre TAS, then that IU will repeat MDA for one additional round.
The format for Mf survey, Pre TAS reporting, and calculation is attached as annexure 9.2 Table 2A and 2B. The
block/IU would qualify for TAS 1 only if all 3 sites individually report <1% Mf rate.
Monitoring of the NBS and Pre- TAS.
The Mf survey activity and pre-TAS activities need to be monitored during the implementation of the NBS and
check the quality of the slides collected, de-hemoglobinization, fixing and staining process. These activities
need to cross checked using the Night Blood Survey Monitoring and Post NBS activity monitoring check
list NBS (Annexure 4) by the block level supervisory teams, DVBDC, staff of National Filaria Control Units,
state consultants and officers, RD office Filaria consultants and officers.
If all the sites individually report Mf <1% (based on NBS positives), then the IU is eligible to conduct TAS1 or IDA Impact Survey (IIS). To undertake Transmission Assessment Survey (TAS), a Pre TAS must be
undertaken to meet the criteria for eligibility.
The following table depicts the difference between previous and current strategies for surveillance activities.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Table 4.4 Difference between previous and current strategies
Components
Previous Strategy
Current Strategy
Proposed Strategy
Implementation Unit
At district
At block
Block with Population up to 1.5 Lakhs
will be one IU. For Population >1.5
lakhs additional IU will be formed
according to popn
No. of MDA
assessment sites
4 sentinel (fixed) and
4 random
1 sentinel and 1
random
1 sentinel and 2 random
Sample size for NBS.
500 samples from
each site @4000 total
slides per district
300 from each site
(600 per block)
300 from each site (900 per block)
Methodology
NBS (Mf rate)
NBS (Mf rate).
NBS (Mf rate)
Sample population
above 2 years
20 years and above
for both DA and IDA
20 years and above for both DA and
IDA
Pre-TAS Assessments
10 additional sites
with sample of 500
per site through NBS
(total sample 5000)
3 additional sites per block (2 sites with the highest risk and 1
random site). 300 samples per site (total of 900 samples) with
NBS for DA. For IDA, FTS followed by NBS in all FTS +ves.
Note: In the absence of sufficient WHO- recommended
RDT, night blood survey might be used for decision
making in Epidemiological Monitoring Survey (EMS) in
IDA units, provided that the programme ensure the quality
of night blood survey as per global standards.
Population
population of
20,00000
Population up to 500000
Transmission
Assessment Survey
6-7 years for DA with
1800 FTS per EU
The survey in the children aged 6-7 years for DA with ~1800
sample size.
20 yrs and above for IDA with ~3150 sample size with Mf
among all FTS positives.
Implementation Unit
Evaluation Unit
4.2.10 Transmission Assessment Surveys
A TAS is the base for a decision to move from MDA to post-MDA surveillance. Transmission Assessment
Surveys (TAS) help evaluate whether MDA has succeeded in lowering the prevalence of infection to a
level where recrudescence is unlikely to occur. In the block level strategy, the Evaluation unit (EU) size is
reduced. An Evaluation unit (EU) will be constituted at a maximum of 500,000 (5 lakh) population. Wherever
feasible, consider combining one or more geographically adjacent blocks that are also at the same stage of the
programme and form one EU – the total population of the EU must not exceed 500,000. The following two
methods are suggested for the transmission assessment:
1. The standard TAS methodology: It is appropriate to continue to use the standard TAS in children when
the following conditions are met:
i.
MDA was delivered as a two-drug regimen (DEC + albendazole)
ii. The total number of MDA rounds with effective coverage of >90% against eligible population and
more than or equal to 5 rounds, for conducting the first TAS assessment.
iii. All 3 sites clear the pre- TAS.
2. The IDA IMPACT SURVEY is appropriate and necessary for making stop treatment decisions under the
following conditions
i.
For new districts conducting 2-3 rounds with IDA having effective coverage of >90% against the
eligible population.
ii. When 1-2 rounds with IDA are implemented after several rounds of DA with effective coverage.
iii. After IDA rounds, the blocks/IU clear pre TAS assessments.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

The standard TAS for DA districts will have a sample of ~1800 to 2000, however for IDA Impact Assessment
the sample size will be ~3150. The Filaria Test Strips (FTS) will be used for antigenemia detection in standard
TAS methodology. However, all FTS positive to be further subjected to confirmatory testing using microscopy
to identify Mf (via thick blood smear) in IDA impact surveys. The TAS process has been explained in detail
in TAS guidelines. For guidance on standard TAS, please visit (http://nvbdcp.gov.in/Doc/TAS-NationalGuidelines-2013-14.pdf). However, the districts that have already cleared any TAS in the past with the
population norm of 20 lakh will continue their assessments with same EU.
Screening is done among children of 6-7 years of age at school or in the community as feasible in standard
TAS for DA and age 20 years and above for IDA Impact Assessment Survey. IDA can accelerate interruption
of transmission and reduce the total number of MDA rounds required. Given the reduction in MDA rounds
recommended prior to impact surveys, and the fact that IDA has little impact on reducing antigenemia levels.
It is therefore necessary to use Mf as the indicator to assess IDA impact.
In each population, Mf prevalence is lowest in children compared to other age groups and is highest in adults,
who have been shown to carry the highest Mf burdens and represent the greatest risk for propagating LF in the
community. A lack of Mf (or antigenemia) in adults is a good indicator that there is no ongoing transmission
of LF in the community. Therefore, Mf is best measured among the adult population aged 20 and above.
(Source: WHO: Protocol for Conducting an IDA Impact Survey)
The survey builder will be used to find the required sample size for each EU and then to determine the critical
cutoff value as well. If the results show several positives below the cut off value, then the EU can move to the
post MDA phase.
Key differences of Standard TAS and IDA Impact Survey
In table 4.5 below mentions the differences in the IDA IMPACT SURVEY from the standard TAS that is used
to make MDA stopping decisions when a two-drug regimen is delivered. The following table depicts the key
differences between the Standard TAS and IDA Impact Survey.
Table 4.5: Key differences between the standard TAS and IDA Impact Survey
Standard TAS
IDA Impact Survey
Target Population
Children 6-7 years; often
operationalized as ‘primary school
entrants’
Adults, aged 20 and above
Selection of clusters
Systematic random sampling or
cluster sampling of schools or
communities within the EU
Random sampling of communities using
probability proportionate to estimated size
sampling
Selection of
individuals within a
cluster
Random sampling of individuals with
a fixed sampling interval, using either
List A or List B
Random sampling of households using a clusterspecific sampling interval
Diagnostic tests
FTS (W bancrofti); Brugia Rapid
(Brugia spp)
FTS (W bancrofti) or Brugia Rapid (Brugia spp)
with confirmatory testing of all positive individuals
using microscopy to identify Mf (via thick blood
smear)
Threshold for decision
making
Average prevalence by FTS or Brugia
Rapid in the EU is <2% where Culex
is the vector (using the upper, 1-sided
95% CI)
Average prevalence of Mf in the EU is <1% where
Culex is the vector (using the upper, 1-sided 95%
CI)
-ANDNo single cluster has an Mf prevalence that is >1%
(using the lower, 1-sided 95% CI)

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Standard TAS
IDA Impact Survey
Applying the critical
cutoff value
Compare the number of observed
positive results in the TAS with the
critical cutoff value in the decision
rule table. If the number of positives
is ≤ critical cutoff, then the area
“passes” the TAS.
Step 1: Compare the number of observed positive
results in the TAS with the critical cutoff value
in the EU Decision Rule table. If the number of
positives is ≤ critical cut off, then proceed to Step 2;
otherwise, the area “fails” the TAS.
Step 2: Compare the number of Mf-positive results
in each cluster with the Cluster Decision Rule
table, if all clusters are ≤ critical cutoff then the EU
“passes”
4.3 During MDA
4.3.1: MDA Drugs and Dosage
Currently, the programme follows two drug regimens: a) Double drug: diethylcarbamazine (DEC) +
Albendazole (ALB) and b) Triple Drug: Ivermectin (IVR)+DEC+ALB are recommended. DEC is administered
at the dose of 6 mg/kg body weight and Albendazole is given in a fixed dose of 400 mg. These two tablets are
administered based on the age of the beneficiary. Ivermectin is given at the dose of 200 mcg/kg body weight,
however in the programme IVR is administered based on the height of the beneficiary using dose pole as
mentioned in below tables.
Table 4.6 Dosage of DEC and Albendazole for population of different age-groups
Age (in Years)
DEC
Albendazole
Total dose to be
Administered
Number of 100
mg tablets
Total dose to be
administered
Number of 400
mg tablets
2 - 5 years
100 mg

400 mg

6-14 years
200 mg

400 mg

15 and above
300 mg

400 mg

Table 4.7 Dosage of Ivermectin tablets for population of different heights
Height (in cms)
Height (in feet)
Number of 3 mg tablets to be given
Less than 90
Less than 3.0

90-119
3-3.9

120-140
3.9- 4.6

141-158
4.6 - 5.2

> 158
> 5.2

Dose pole
No Tablet
1 Tablet
2 Tablets
3 Tablets

Tablets
Figure 4.3 Dose pole (color coded bands) and dosage to be administered according to height of the individuals.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Children less than 2 years of age shouldn’t be given tablet DEC.
Children less than 5 years or with height less than 90 cm shouldn’t be given tablet Ivermectin.
4.3.2 Approaches for Drug Administration
a. House to House Approach (H-t-H) (to be implemented for 8-10 days): Every eligible individual will be
administered the drugs at his/ her doorstep by trained drug administrators.
b. Booth Approach: (to be implemented for 2-3 days). To ensure MDA drugs are easily available for the
eligible population at their convenience as they are not available at their houses during house-house
activity. For effective implementation of the booth approach a robust planning is required with details like
name of site, drugs and logistics, visibility (banner), timings, days etc.
All booths administering MDA will be identified in the planning stage and report the details as per Annexure 2.
Each booth will be manned by two Drug Administrators. All efforts should be ensured for Directly Observed
Consumption. Booth coverage to be recorded separately from H-t-H coverage.
Schools are effective platforms for achieving the desired MDA coverages since children are mostly missed
during the house-to-house survey. It is advisable to cover the schools during the last 2-3 days of the MDA
campaign, since by that time, the awareness about the campaign is well disseminated and hence the acceptance
of the drugs is better. Care should be taken that children treated in schools are recorded accurately in the
formats so that they are matched with family registers during the H-t-H approach. Utmost care to be given to
not administer the drugs to the same child in school and household by use of indelible finger markers.
Special population groups in places like offices, industries, health facilities (public and private), medical
college OPD, prisons, marketplaces, fairs, health facilities, religious places, agriculture fields, etc. – will be
approached for delivery of the drugs using booths. Booths located in hospital settings, medical colleges to
continue throughout the MDA campaign. Special attention will be given to reaching out to urban slums,
construction sites, brick kilns, and migratory population through mobile teams. Booth Day and location
should be clearly specified in the micorplans. Based on the need a Mobile team may be planned where the
Booth Day will move from one place to another place for administering drugs.
Logistics required for MDA: All logistics (as per DA or IDA) must be ensured by every DA team before
starting the activity every day, supervisor should also ensure all these essential items are available with the DA
teams before starting the activity under their supervision as per Table 4.8
Table 4.8: Logistics for MDA
Logistics required
Sl.No
At booth level
During house-to-house activity
1.
Micro plan for all days (with contact no of
supervisor and details of RRT Team)
Micro plan for all days (with contact no of supervisor
and details of RRT Team)
2.
Family register (for booth approach tally sheets will
be required; for group approach participants details
format required)
Family register (To track and administration of drug
to them who have not taken drug till the field visit of
team)
3.
Daily reporting format (including Adverse events
reporting Format)
Daily reporting format (including Adverse reporting
format)
4.
LF line list for updating
LF line list for updating

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Sl.No
At booth level
During house-to-house activity
5.
Adequate drugs (DEC +Albendazole for MDA
and Ivermectin additionally for IDA) as per
requirement according to total beneficiary’s
quantum, (adequate drug means; DEC/Ivermectin
= 2.5 X total eligible population & Albendazole = 1
X total eligible population)
Adequate drugs (DEC +Albendazole for MDA and
Ivermectin additionally for IDA) as per requirement
according to total eligible population (adequate
drug means; DEC/Ivermectin = 2.5 X total eligible
population & Albendazole = 1 X eligible population)
6.
Medical kit to tackle with adverse drug reactions
Medical kit to tackle with adverse drug reactions
7.
Table/chairs/waste disposal bags/pens/drinking
water storage vessel, glasses (may be disposable),
utensils cleaning material if glasses are not
disposable
Pens, bag (to keep drug/formats/ Dose pole or flex
measuring tape/other logistics)
8.
Availability of IEC materials (posters, banners,
leaflets/flyers in English/Hindi and the local
languages)
Availability of IEC materials (leaflets/flyers in English/
Hindi and the local languages for sensitization of
beneficiaries/community)
9.
Indelible nail marker, Chalk/Geru for house
marking
Indelible nail marker, Chalk/Geru for house marking
10.
Dose pole or flex measuring tape (For IDA only)
Dose pole or flex measuring tape (For IDA only)
4.3.3 Inauguration
MDA inauguration should be an important event, as it gives visibility to the programme. The presence of
Political leaders, district magistrate, municipal commissioners/ ward members, BDOs, DEOs celebrities,
community leaders, media, prominent religious leaders etc makes the event impactful. All the important
dignitaries should be requested to consume drugs in presence of the media for acceptance by the communities
and to allay any fears of adverse events. The media should be requested to cover the event widely for larger
visibility of the programme.
4.3.4 Drug Administration
Drug administration needs to be conducted as
per the micorplans. Each Drug Administrator
will be responsible for drug administration in the
designated areas. She/he must cover the area and
ensure 100% reach and ensure Direct Observed
Consumption (DOC). Drug Administrator’s has
flexibility of timing of work and shall be free to
plan work schedule as per their convenience.
Drug Administrators should be encouraged to
conduct revisits for maximum reach of households
and DOC with focus on the absent members
of the family. During house-to-house activities
the community must be informed about the
availability of the drugs at the booths. The drugs
in any case should not be left with the individual or
relatives for later administration. The drug consumption should be avoided empty stomach to prevent nausea
and vomiting in some people, so the timing of the team visit should be planned accordingly.
The Drug Administrator should complete/update the information in the family registers immediately. The DA
team should mark refusals, absentees in the family register and plan revisits to cover them.
Night revisits by DA teams in Odisha

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

4.3.5 Marking
Finger marking: Every person after consumption of anti-filarial drugs should be marked by the Drug
Administrator on the finger as per the instruction below and the following points should be emphasized
during finger marking.
-
Finger marking should be done after the eligible person has adhered to the DOC and consumed all the
drugs as per the dosage.
-
Marking should be done by an indelible marker pen only, preferably on the left index finger.
-
Marker pen should be capped immediately and kept in a horizontal position to prevent it from drying.
House Marking: This helps in easy identification of the houses that are fully covered, partially covered, or
uncovered under MDA during the round. The Drug Administrator should mark the house after completing
the administration of drugs to all the eligible members.
-
House marking should be done with chalk or geru. It should be clear, visible, and readable.
-
House marking should incorporate the information about house number, team number, date of visit of
team, category of house (F or X), total number of eligible members, total members who have consumed
the drugs and the direction of team movement of DA team.
-
Mark a house ‘F’ when all eligible members in the house have consumed the entire course of MDA drugs
under direct observation of the DA team.
-
Mark a house ‘X’ when one or more than one eligible member didn’t consume the entire course of drugs
due to any reason.
Figure 4.4: Housing Marking
Figure 4.4: Housing Marking

Above example of house marking indicating that team number 20 visited to house number 20 which is
categorized as X, on 25/05/20 and out of six eligible members, three consumed THE entire course of MDA
drugs under direct observation of team and team moved forward toward right direction. House marking at
the time of revisit indicates that the team revisited the house on 26/05/2020 at 2 pm and was able to convert
the house to “F” (drugs were consumed by the remaining eligible family members).
4.3.6 Addressing refusals.
People and households showing reluctance to participate in and undergo treatment should be approached and
informed about the safety and significance of the treatment. Supervisors play a crucial role in handholding
the DAs to address refusals. The DAs should be encouraged to seek help from local influencers to convince

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

the refusals by responding to the queries or reasons for non- compliance. The DAs should mark the refusals
in the family register and inform the supervisors if the number of refusals is huge in a particular community
or geography. In urban areas, a small group or task force can be formed with 4-5 key influencers or use the
existing list of influencers for immunization campaigns.
If the supervisor could not convince the refusals, they must seek help from the PHC Medical Officer. The PHC
staff must visit such communities and try to convince them for DOC by addressing their concerns for refusals.
4.3.7 Adverse Events / Post Consumption Events
Drugs used in MDA either as a double drug regimen or triple drug regimen are very safe. In very few people,
consuming the drugs may produce mild to moderate adverse events after MDA, serious adverse events are
very rare. These drugs may produce adverse events in 1-2% of the persons consumed and most of the adverse
events are self-limiting.
-
Some of the commonly occurring adverse events are headache, anorexia, nausea, abdominal pain,
vomiting, dizziness, weakness, or lethargy. These symptoms begin within 1-2 hours of taking the drug and
may persist for a few hours.
-
Specific parasite related allergic reactions due to destruction of microfilariae and adult worms include
fever, local inflammations around dead worms with localized itching.
-
These adverse events need to be treated with antipyretics/analgesics and anti-allergic agents. The events
also disappear spontaneously with or without symptomatic treatment.
If the DA teams are unable to decide on the treatment, they should immediately call or inform the RRT.
The following referral mechanism needs to be followed for management of side effects that require medical
attention. If there are any adverse events reported in the field, they need to be informed and reported with the
concerned PHC medical officers, district officials or committees.
Drug administrators and Supervisors should know about common side effects and assure people in
community that these side effects are due to action of drug against worm in the body.
The anti- filarial drugs should not be taken on an empty stomach. Therefore, the timing of the team’s
visit should be planned accordingly.
There is a risk from coincidental events also. A coincidental event is an adverse event that happens during or
immediately after a large-scale MDA. In certain cases, such events are falsely attributed to the drugs used in
the MDA. When treating large numbers of people, there is a fair chance that any event taking place during or
immediately after the drugs may be falsely considered to be ‘caused’ by the intervention or falsely attributed
to the medicines used in MDA. If necessary, investigating such cases is very important to enable programme

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

managers to respond to a community’s concerns, to dissipate public fear and maintain the credibility and
confidence in MDA. Generally, severe adverse event is very rare, but if there are any instances reported of
prolonged hospitalisation of more than 24 hrs duration or any death reported in the field (causal or noncausal) which may or may not be related to the MDA, they need to be properly investigated by the concerned
district officials or pharmacovigilance committee members for further verification of the cause. The details of
post consumption events need to be updated in the annexure 9.8, Table 8.
Rapid Response Teams (RRTs): For each MDA district/Implementing Unit, rapid response teams should
be formed during pre-MDA period. The RRT should be trained on the safety of MDA drugs and should
be provided with all necessary medicines and other tools to deal with any drug reactions. The team should
comprise of minimum one medical officer supported by a staff nurse/ANM and a pharmacist. The medical
officers of Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram (RBSK) can also be considered as RRT member. The district and
block should prepare the list of RRT teams before MDA and details need to be included in the micro plan after
proper training.
Whenever there is a need for transporting such cases to health facilities, the referral transport under NHM
is to be utilized. In the event of any adverse events, the DAs should immediately inform the sector DA, team
supervisors, and note down adverse events in the family register.
4.3.8 Urban Strategies
Successful conduction of MDA in urban areas is a challenge, it is essential to have focus on urban areas. This is
because urban areas encompass a diverse range of populations, including high-rise buildings, gated colonies,
resettlement areas, and densely populated areas. Together with the huge population that must be covered in
these areas, it is suggested to conduct Mf survey as per revised IU strategy and finalize the areas that require
MDA, in the areas reporting Mf >1. Further, Municipal Commissioners to be included during the review
meeting since their insights and authority are essential for ensuring comprehensive and impactful MDA in
urban localities.
The urban strategies mostly remain the same as in rural areas. The challenges in urban areas differ in terms of
acceptance of drugs, mobilization of communities, deployment of accountable staff. However, the program
should be well prepared with advanced planning, meticulous micro plans to avoid missed areas, robust
mobilization plan with intensive IEC. For ensuring accountability and optimum compliance, it is essential to
engage UHC, Municipal authorities (health and Swachh-Bharat), CSR bodies.
Engage NGOs or other institutions for awareness and IEC activities. Private clinics and hospitals should be
effectively engaged through Rotary and IMA in setting up booths. The Resident Welfare Associations to be
approached for residential complexes, booths to be established in marketplaces, malls, and office for better
compliance to MDA drugs.
In urban areas, as most of the DAs are volunteers so the following aspects need to be considered:
-
Identification and training need to be completed at least 10 days prior to MDA.
-
The existing urban staff from Ayushman Arogya Mandir/Urban PHC/ICDS peripheral health staff to
be identified and selected, in addition, local volunteers, Nursing students can also be engaged for MDA
implementation.
-
Engage one experienced DA along with a newly identified DA.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Supervisors and Sector Supervisors plan must be submitted to the Block
PHC along with the micro plan before starting MDA. District and
state supervision plans need to be submitted. In addition, for effective
monitoring in Urban areas the following committees need to be formed.
A special urban task force should be formed under the chairmanship
of the Municipal Commissioner. The members of the task force should
include CMO/ACMO NUHM, Municipal health officer, nodal person
from medical college/nursing college, IMA and IAP representatives,
representatives from local clubs, NGO/CSR to ensure proper planning, monitoring with periodic reviews for
mid-course correction.
The first meeting of the urban task force should be held at least two months prior to the start of the campaign.
The second meeting should be held one month after the first meeting to monitor the progress in preparedness.
The task force should review the MDA campaign at least once during the MDA for required mid-course
correction. The final review of the MDA campaign must be undertaken by the urban task force one week after
the campaign is completed.
4.3.9 Mop-up activities
It is very important to carry out mop up activities to increase the drug compliance which should be at least
90% of the eligible population. Mop-up activities should be planned meticulously so that left out households
& missed areas get covered to maximize drug consumption. Mopping-up activity should be planned for five
days following the last day of drug administration so that the left-out households, poorly covered areas in
rural/tribal/urban and missed areas identified during team visits, supervisory visits, and rapid convenience
monitoring (RCM) may be taken up, to maximize drug consumption, in the urban and rural population. The
same drug administrator’s teams implementing House to House Survey will conduct mopping up operations
in areas with low coverage and left out/missed areas, the supervisory staff should also assist the teams to
improve the drug consumption/compliance. Data from the Mop-up activity should be added to the final MDA
coverage report before submission to the district and state.
MDA Coverage
MDA coverage determines the effectiveness and success of the MDA programme and thereby success of the
programme to eliminate LF. Each eligible individual in the community should be administered drugs during
MDA round. The target for effective coverage should be more than or equal to 90% across DA blocks and IDA
blocks amongst the eligible population.
The Effective coverage for a block or IU is calculated as:
No. of people consumed LF drugs through Directly Observed Consumption in the IU X 100
Total Eligible Population of the IU
4.3.10 Data Recording and Submission of Information
All DAs/ASHAs shall ensure the timely completion of all the requisite reports. They are supposed to record data
in the prescribed family register for the consumption of drugs, and in the format for the line listing of the LF
cases. Supervisors shall be responsible for the collection of reports from their respective DAs and submission
of these reports daily to the PHCs/UPHCs. Supervisors and Sector Supervisors shall also compile their action
taken report (based on their daily supervision) and submit it to the PHC/UPHC. The supervisors will put
their signature/ initials in the family register, wherever they have cross verified the reported beneficiaries. At

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

the block level or IU level, the data will be daily uploaded on the LF- IHIP portal. At the district programme
office, all the data and reports received from all PHCs should be processed and a coverage report prepared and
submitted to the state programme office daily. The final block wise coverage reports are to be prepared and
submitted to the state program office immediately after completion of the mop up campaign.
4.4 Post MDA
MDA Coverage Evaluation Surveys: The CES shall be conducted by medical colleges/WHO/ICMR/academic
institutes immediately after completion of mop up activities and completed within a month of completion of
MDA. The details on CES are mentioned in chapter 10.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Chapter-5
DIAGNOSTIC TOOLS
-
In W. bancrofti endemic areas - primary diagnostic tools used in mapping, impact assessment
and stopping MDA decision include Microfilaremia testing or Assessment of circulating filarial
antigenemia using Filariasis Test Strip.
-
In B. malayi endemic areas - primary diagnostic tools used in mapping, impact assessment and
stopping MDA decision include Microfilaremia testing or Filarial antibody detection using Rapid
test.
-
In Microfilaremia testing-Blood films (20-μl thick) are prepared to detect the presence of
microfilaremia.
5.1 Introduction
Diagnostic tools play important role in the programmes to eliminate LF because they are critical to map
the LF endemic areas and decide whether to implement MDA or not, measure the impact of MDA and
assess post-MDA transmission to stop MDA and the resurgence of LF infection. Until recently, the choice of
diagnostic methods was limited to detection of microfilaremia in peripheral blood or clinical examination
of community members for chronic disease conditions. However, during the last 20 years there have been
tremendous advances and new immunodiagnostic methods have emerged. The high sensitivity and specificity
of immunodiagnostic methods have enabled the LF elimination programmes to measure the LF infection
prevalence and incidence accurately and make programmatic decisions robustly.
The primary diagnostic tools used in mapping, impact assessment and stopping MDA decision include
Microfilaria testing and circulating filarial antigenemia (CFA) tests. Those used in post-TAS surveillance
include Antibody testing and xenomonitoring. Currently, the most used diagnostic tools are assessment
of CFA or microfilaraemia in W. bancrofti endemic areas and antibody testing or Mf testing in B. malayi
endemic areas. Mf testing is performed through night blood sample collection from community members
(as W. bancrofti and B. malayi in India are mostly nocturnally periodic) and thick smear examination in the
laboratory. Earlier CFA was assessed using ICT card. This was recently replaced with an improved version,
FTS. Antibody levels in B. malayi endemic areas is assessed using Brugia rapid test. The commonly used
diagnostic techniques - Mf testing method, CFA assessment using FTS and antibody testing using Brugia
rapid test are described below.
5.2 Blood testing for Mf
Detection of Mf in peripheral blood is the gold standard method for the diagnosis of LF infection in community
members. The blood samples are mostly collected depending on the periodicity of Mf. The Mf of both
W. bancrofti and B. malayi exhibits nocturnal periodicity in all endemic areas in India (except in the Andaman
and Nicobar Island, where Mf exhibit diurnally sub-periodic pattern).
Hence, blood samples should be collected during nighttime, when the density of Mf is high in peripheral blood.
Although the Mf density peaks during midnight hours, blood samples are collected from individuals aged 20
years using systematic random sampling covering the households of that village and above only between 10 pm
and 12 am. Prior to the Mf survey, community members need to be informed about the survey and make it an
event by engaging local and influential people for mobilizing the community to participate in the NBS activity.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

5.2.1 Preparation of a Blood Smear for LF Microscopy
The smear for LF microscopy is made from 20 microliter (4-5 drops) collected through finger prick. The smear
is made at night between 10 pm and midnight.
Equipment required:
-
Clean glass slides.
-
Disposable lancets.
-
Spirit or anti-septic solution.
-
Small bottle with cork for keeping spirit or anti-septic solution.
-
Slide box for 25 or 50 slides.
-
Glass marking pencil.
-
Lead pencil.
-
Register and Survey forms.
-
Ball point pen.
-
Emergency light
-
Buffer water
-
JSB-1 Stain/Giemsa Stain
-
2% acid alcohol (2 parts of concentrated hydrochloric acid and 98 % of methanol by volume)
-
Immersion oil
-
Microscope (low power (X10) and high power (X100), oil immersion lens objective)
-
Packing paper and rubber band.
Method and steps to follow:
First Step
-
Select third/ring finger of the left hand of the person.
-
With the palm facing upward hold the left finger between thumb and
forefinger at the first phalangeal joint.
-
Wipe fingertip with a swab dipped in spirit or anti-septic solution.
-
Allow the fingertip to dry.
Second Step
-
Hold
the
lancet
in
right
hand
and
prick
the
finger
using quick rolling action.
-
Allow blood drop to ooze.
Third Step
-
Take a clean slide.
-
Apply gentle pressure, take 4-5 big drops of the blood (20 microliter)
in the centre of the glass slide.
Fourth Step
-
Take another clean slide with smooth edges and use it as a spreader.
-
Use the corner of the spreader, quickly join the larger drops of blood,
and spread to make a thick oval film. (20mm wide and 30 mm long)
-
Put the slide number on the glass slide with glass marking pencil.
-
Allow it to dry flat.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Fifth Step
-
Place the slide in clean slide box or wrap the dry slide in a clean paper.
Sixth Step
-
On the following day, re-write the same slide number with lead pencil in the middle of the smear before
dehaemoglobinisation.
Staining and Examination of Blood Smears: Blood Smears should be dehaemoglobinised and stained
preferably within 24 hours. The smears prepared during the preceding night should be stained during the
next day and not later than 48 hours.
Method and steps
Step 1 - Dehaemoglobinisation
-
Put the dried smears in a jar/beaker containing clean water for 3-5 minutes.
-
Again, flush the thick film by pouring water with the help of dropper.
-
Take out smears and let them air dry.
Step 2 - Fixing
-
Dip each smear completely in a jar/beaker containing 2% acid alcohol (2 parts of conc. HCL and 98 parts
of methanol by volume) for a second.
-
Let the smear air dry.
Step 3 - Staining
-
Dip the slide in a jar or beaker containing JSB-1 Stain (40-60 seconds)/Giemsa Stain (45 minutes).
-
Wash the smear with buffer water/tap water in beaker/jar.
-
Allow the slide to air dry.
-
Water for washing the blood smear should be filtered before use with ordinary filter paper to remove
any suspended particles.
-
Do not use the used slides.
-
A 50 ml beaker containing JSB-I can stain 60-70 slides. The solution should be discarded after staining
60-70 slides and not reused or mixed with the stock solution.
-
Buffer water should be changed when the colour of the water changes to light blue.
A GOOD QUALITY-STAINED SMEAR
-
Has a bluish translucent background.
-
No RBCs are seen. Only a faint cell outline may sometimes be visible.
-
Stained platelets, WBCs and parasites are seen.
An experienced technician can stain about 60 smears, which takes
about one hour and 15 minutes, and examine nearly 75 slides in a day.
Examine the preparation under the microscope.

Use the 10x objective to locate the microfilariae. If Mf or any other
object is visualized switch to 100x oil objective for better visualization.
and identification of species. The complete smear should be visualized.
to record the number of microfilariae in the smear.

Figure 5.4: Microfilaria of W. bancrofti

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Advantages of LF microscopy
-
It is a cost-effective technique, long practiced, and Mf surveys require less training.
Disadvantages of LF microscopy
-
Blood samples need to be collected in the nighttime; hence people’s cooperation is poor and it is a
cumbersome procedure.
-
It takes at least 1-2 days to know the result.
-
The sensitivity is poor and detection of low-density Mf carriers are often miss, leading to underestimation
of the LF infection prevalence.
W. bancrofti
B. malayi
Sheath present
Sheath present
Mean length 260u (range 244-296u)
Mean length 220u (range 177-230u)
Tail tapers to a point
Tail tapers and swollen at caudal nuclei
Caudal nuclei absent
Caudal nuclei present
The following are the differences between Mf of W. bancrofti and B. malayi

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

5.3 CFA assessment using FTS
The Filariasis Test Strip (FTS) is a qualitative, point-of-care diagnostic tool that detects wuchereria bancrofti
CFA in human blood, serum, or plasma. The Global Programme to Eliminate Lymphatic Filariasis employs
the FTS for mapping filariasis-endemic areas and assessing the success of elimination efforts. This is currently
the most widely used method in the programmes to eliminate LF. The required blood sample can be collected
at any time, and this makes conducting the surveys easy. The following charts depicts the testing procedure
and interpretation of FTS are shown below:
Filariasis Test Strip
The FTS is a rapid diagnositc tool used for the qualitative detection of wuchereria bancrofti antigen in human
blood samples collected by fingerstick. Although the test is relatively simple to use, adequate training is
necessary to reduce inter-observer variablity and to reduce the misreading of stripts.
Basic Guidelines
i.
Kits should be stored at 2-37°C. Test strips should NOT be frozen. The Filariasis Test Strip kit is stable until
the expiration date marked on its outer packaging when stored as specified. Kits should NOT be used past
the expiration date.
ii. Before beginning field surveys, two strips from each lot of kits should be tested using a positive control
that can be obtained from the Filariasis Research Reagent Repository Center (www.filariasiscenter.org).
DO NOT use strips that are negative when tested with the control.
iii. When transporting strips for use in the field, a cool box is not required. However, care should be taken not
to expose strips to extreme heat for prolonged periods of time.
iv. Strips must be read using bright unfiltered light. Faint lines can be difficult to see when lighting is not
adequate. This is especially important when reading strips at night.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Figure 5 .5: Chart showing the use of Filaria Test Strip
Advantages
-
The sensitivity and specificity of the test is very high.
-
This is a point of care test, and the result is obtained within 15 minutes.
Disadvantages
-
It is an expensive method.
-
Supplies are often not readily available.
-
Often, the quality of some batches of the test kits are sub-optimal.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Antibody assessment using Brugia rapid test.
Brugia Rapid Test is a rapid dipstick test lined with a Brugia malayi recombinant antigen and is widely used for
mapping and monitoring and evaluation and surveillance purposes in B. malayi endemic areas (WHO, 2011).
Charts showing the use of BRT test are shown below.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Figure 5.6 Chart showing the use of Brugia Rapid Test (BRT)
In 2022, a multicentric evaluation was carried out and found inconsistent results and variability between lots.
WHO recommended the temporary discontinuation of the use of BRTs until the quality is improved. For
Burgia Impact Survey please refer to the WHO interim guidelines as below
Areas with only Brugia
Brugia and Bancrofti
mixed areas
TAS1
TAS2
TAS3
Continue MDA until
quality rapid test kits are
available; Or
Conduct a Brugia Impact
Survey (BIS). If passed
BIS, stop MDA.
Postpone TAS2 until quality
rapid test kits are available.
If the TAS2 is carried out
with BRT, 4 or more years
after the last MDA, it can be
considered a TAS3.
Postpone TAS3 until a
quality rapid test kit is
available.
Conduct a TAS with FTS
in schools (Wb) and take
night blood samples (Bm)
from adults in the villages
where the schools are
located; or
Conduct a BIS.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Chapter-6
EARLY DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT OF
LYMPHATIC FILARIASIS
-
Lymphatic filariasis has a wide range of clinical expressions, with most infected individuals showing
no symptoms.
-
Even asymptomatic cases often exhibit subclinical lymphatic dilation and dysfunction caused by adult
filarial worms.
-
Filarial lymphadenopathy is common in infected children, and adult worms can be detected before
puberty using ultrasonography.
-
Death of adult worms triggers acute filarial lymphangitis, primarily in the limbs, leading to mild
systemic symptoms like headache or fever.
-
Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia (TPE) syndrome, marked by cough, fever, and eosinophilia, occurs
without peripheral microfilaremia, primarily affecting men aged between 20 to 40.
-
Disease manifestations appears commonly over 10 years of age. The infection increases with age
reaching a peak between 20 and 25 years.
6.1 Introduction
The clinical expression of lymphatic filariasis varies considerably. Filarial lymphadenopathy is seen commonly
in infected children; before puberty, adult worms can be detected by ultrasonography of the inguinal and
axillary lymph nodes and vessels. Death of the adult worm triggers an acute inflammatory response, which
progresses distally (retrograde) along the affected lymphatic vessel, usually in the limbs and is termed acute
filarial lymphangitis. If present, systemic symptoms, such as headache or fever, are generally mild. The disease
spectrum of LF ranges from the initial phase of asymptomatic microfilaremia to the later stages of acute,
chronic, and occult clinical manifestations.
In post pubertal males, adult Wuchereria bancrofti organisms are found mostly in the intra-scrotal lymphatic
vessels and can be visualized on ultrasound examination. Inflammation resulting from adult worm death, in
this area, may present as funiculitis, epididymitis, or orchitis. A tender granulomatous nodule may be palpable
at the site of the dead adult worms.
Cough, fever, breathlessness, and wheezing with marked eosinophilia, high serum immunoglobulin E
concentrations, and positive anti-filarial antibodies are manifestations of the tropical pulmonary eosinophilia
(TPE) syndrome. Peripheral microfilaremia is absent in patients with TPE. Most cases of TPE have been
reported in long-term residents from Asia. Men 20 to 40 years old are mostly affected.
The filarial infection usually starts in children and a vast majority of infected people remain asymptomatic
(Asymptomatic Mf carriers), but virtually all of them have subclinical lymphatic damage (lymph vessel
dilatation). Disease manifestations appears commonly over 10 years of age. The infection increases with age
reaching a peak between 20 and 25 years. The early symptoms and signs of lymphatic filariasis may vary
depending on the stage of the infection.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

6.2 Pathogenesis and Pathology
The pathology associated with lymphatic filariasis results from a complex interplay of the pathogenic potential
of the parasite, the immune response of the host, and external (‘complicating’) bacterial and fungal infections.
Genital damage (specifically hydrocele) and lymphoedema/elephantiasis are the most recognizable clinical
entities associated with lymphatic filarial infections. There are much earlier stages of lymphatic pathology
and dysfunction whose recognition has only recently been made possible through ultrasonographic and
lymphoscintigraphic techniques. Ultrasonography has identified massive lymphatic dilatation around adult
filarial worms. This dilatation can extend several centimetres beyond these worm “nests”. The adult worms
although in continuous vigorous motion, appear to remain ‘fixed’ at characteristic sites within lymphatic
vessels. The disease manifestations and management are explained in more detail in Chapter 8 (MMDP).
6.3 Asymptomatic Presentations
Less than half the individuals with lymphatic filariasis appear clinically asymptomatic although they have
microfilariae circulating in their blood. However, nearly all have hidden damage to their lymphatic systems
(as evidenced by lympho-scintigraphy), and/or renal systems (microscopic haematuria and/or proteinuria),
and possible other systems. This state of asymptomatic microfilaremia is associated with a highly downregulated immune system. It is unclear how, when, or even whether these individuals will progress to develop
one of the more overt clinical manifestations of filarial disease.
6.3.1 Stages and identification of Symptoms
Most infected people have no symptoms and they do not know that they have LF unless tested. At least half
of all patients with LF are asymptomatic people. These asymptomatic infections gradually cause damage to
the lymphatic system, kidneys, and disturbance in the body’s immune system, and this is directly linked
to the efficiency of the patient’s immune and may have acute inflammation of lymphatic vessels with high
temperatures, chills, body aches, and swollen lymph nodes. Excessive amounts of fluid may accumulate in the
affected tissues.
The common indicators to identify early cases with lymphatic filariasis:
1. Asymptomatic Stage:
In many cases, individuals infected with lymphatic filariasis may not exhibit any symptoms. However, the
presence of the following signs may suggest an infection:
-
Mild fever
-
Generalized body aches.
-
Fatigue and weakness
-
Swollen lymph nodes
Lymphatic filariasis symptoms are caused by adult worms.

2. Acute Stage
Early in the infection, people may have symptoms for 4 to 7 days. They may have a fever, swollen lymph nodes
in the armpits and groin, and pain in the limbs and groin. Pus may collect in a leg and drain to the skin’s
surface, resulting in a scar.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Bacterial infections of the skin and tissues under the skin are more likely because the worms block the lymphatic
vessels which makes the immune system less able to defend the skin and adjacent tissues from bacteria. Often,
symptoms resolve, then recur. They are more severe when people are exposed to the infection for the first time.
Some individuals may experience an acute inflammatory reaction called “acute filarial lymphangitis” during
which the lymphatic vessels become inflamed. Symptoms during this stage may include:
-
Severe and recurrent episodes of fever.
-
Pain and swelling in the limbs, genitalia, breasts, or scrotum.
-
Redness and warmth of the affected area.
-
Headaches and migratory joint pains.
3. Chronic Stage:
If left untreated, lymphatic filariasis can progress to a chronic stage. It’s important to note that symptoms may
vary among individuals, and not all infected individuals will develop chronic manifestations. If you suspect
lymphatic filariasis or have been exposed to mosquito bites in endemic areas, it is crucial to seek medical
attention for proper diagnosis and treatment.
The following steps needs to be considered for early screening/identification of lymphatic filariasis based
on fever cases and early symptoms:
Step 1: Assess the presence of fever: If the individual exhibit fever and is from LF endemic region or has a
travel history to LF endemic area, lymphatic filariasis may be suspected.
Step 2: Evaluate for early symptoms: Check for the presence of mild fever, generalized body aches, fatigue,
weakness, and swollen lymph nodes. If these symptoms are present, proceed to the next step.
Step 3: Rule out other potential causes of fever: Since lymphatic filariasis is not the only condition that
can cause these symptoms, it is important to rule out other possible causes of fever such as viral infections,
bacterial infections, or other inflammatory conditions.,
All the fever cases need to be evaluated as per the duration of fever (greater or less than 14 days). Any fever
with more than 14 days needs to evaluate for Kala-azar, Tuberculosis, Typhoid etc. If fever duration is less
than 14 days, must undergo a Malaria test and evaluate for the symptoms of other diseases like Dengue,
Chikungunya, Japanese Encephalitis, Leptospirosis, Scrub typhus etc. If any disease symptoms are present,
proceed with the diagnostic test as applicable.
Step 4: Assess specific indicators of lymphatic filariasis: If the individual has persistent or recurring
fever along with pain and swelling in the limbs, genitalia, breasts, or scrotum, it may indicate acute filarial
lymphangitis.
Step 5: Seek medical attention: If there are persistent or concerning symptoms, it is important to consult
a healthcare professional or visit nearest health facility/HWC for further evaluation and proper diagnosis.
Diagnostic tests, such as night blood test to detect microfilariae or antigen tests (FTS), can confirm the
presence of lymphatic filariasis.
All Mf positive cases confirmed by NBS or FTS test would be treated with Directly Observed single dose of DA
or IDA as per the MDA schedule, followed by standard DEC of dosage 6mg/Kg body weight daily for 12 days
to be consumed after the meal. Each positive case to be followed up with repeat testing for every 6 months
(if positive) to be done till they are Mf negative. This would prevent any chronic manifestations later.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

6.4 Diagnostic methods for detection of early stages of Lymphatic filariasis
The diagnosis of filariasis can be done by different methods such as follows:
Blood tests: Blood counts are done, especially the eosinophils. Since lymphatic filariasis does not always result
in clinical symptoms, the most accurate way to determine if someone is infected is a blood test. In most parts
of the world, the parasites have a “nocturnal periodicity” that restricts their appearance in the blood to only
the hours of 10.00pm - 12am. Therefore, the diagnosis of lymphatic filariasis traditionally has depended on
the laboratory examination of blood taken between 10pm and 2am when microfilariae are most common in
peripheral blood. Identification of the type of microfilariae is done according to the characteristics of the stage
larva (L3) in human, such as the number and position of caudal nuclei, cephalic space, and the presence or
absence of sheath.
Identification of microfilariae in a urine and hydrocele fluid: This is done by centrifuging the fluids samples,
the resulting deposits are put on a slide, and examined under the microscope.
Antigen detection: Circulating filarial antigen (CFA) detection should be used for diagnosing the most
common Wuchereria bancrofti infections using The Filariasis Test Strips. The specificity of this assay is excellent,
and the sensitivity is greater than that achievable by the earlier parasite-detection assays. All individuals
with microfilaremia also have detectable circulating antigen, as do a proportion of those microfilaraemia
individuals with clinical manifestations of filariasis (e.g., lymphoedema or elephantiasis) but have no circulating
microfilariae. In addition, some individuals who appear normal also have detectable circulating antigen that
disappears after effective treatment for these cryptic infections.
Unfortunately, no antigen test is currently available for brugian filariasis although an antibody test (Brugia
Rapid test) does exist, and this is in fact useful for detecting the presence of actual and or previous infection
and is useful in the community diagnosis.
Clinical Diagnosis: Many lymphatic filariasis patients are microfilaraemic, and because no serologic test other
than that detecting CFA is specific, in the absence of antigen testing the diagnosis of these infections must be
made ‘clinically’ (i.e., on circumstantial evidence) with support from antibody or other laboratory assays.
Imaging Techniques
X-rays Diagnosis: Conventional X-rays are rarely helpful in diagnosing lymphatic filarial infection, except in
the case of tropical eosinophilia where the picture can be variable but characteristically includes interstitial
thickening and diffuse nodular mottling in the lung fields.
Ultrasound: Ultrasound examination of the lymphatics (especially scrotal lymphatics in men, and the breast
and retro-peritoneal lymphatics in women) can reveal rapidly moving (“dancing”) adult worms.
Lymphoscintigraphy: lymphoscintigraphy, though not diagnostic of filarial infection, can identify lymphatic
functional and gross anatomical abnormalities.
Biopsy: In situations of lymphadenopathy with or without accompanying inflammation of the nodes
or lymphatic vessels, biopsy can often detect adult worms, but this approach is rarely used as a diagnostic
procedure.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Advances in diagnosis and treatment
Sustained LF research led to the development of new diagnostics, treatment regimens and morbidity
management measures. Highly specific and sensitive antigen based diagnostic methods were refined and
standardized and commercialized, which eased the challenge of night blood sampling for diagnosis of
infection. Subsequently, antibody based diagnostic methods were also developed. Until recently, BinaxNOW
Filariasis was the only immunochromatographic test (ICT) commercially available against Bancroftian
filariasis infection. A new point-of-care rapid diagnostic test -Filariasis Test Strip (FTS) - is designed to detect
in human blood the Ag of W. bancrofti.
The FTS has been evaluated in different countries and is now being used in mapping, monitoring, and
evaluation activities. FTS Kits are used for Transmission Assessment Survey activity and Night Blood Survey
activity are used for blood slide examination. The Brugia RapidTM test detects antibodies to Brugia malayi
and B. timori. Infected people have elevated levels of antibodies, but the results of antibody testing do not
distinguish between current and past infection. However, detection in children demonstrates recent infection.
6.5 Treatment of all Mf and Ag positive cases and Algorithm for Management
The positive cases that are detected in the health care facilities or during NBS surveys and TAS surveys, need
to be treated with Directly Observed Single dose of DA or IDA (Day 1) as per the MDA schedule, followed by
standard treatment with DEC of dosage 6mg/Kg body weight daily for 12 days to be consumed after the meal
and ensure follow up of such cases.
All the family members of the Mf positive cases and their immediate neighborhood are also to be screened
(30-40 households) for Mf by NBS/FTS and all +ve cases need to be followed up for 2 years. NBS of all the Mf
positive cases need to be repeated every 6 months till the time the individual is negative for Mf.
The format for compiling the information is attached in Annexure 5.
Figure 6.1: Algorithm for Management and Follow up of Acute LF Cases
Management after acute stage subsides- Single
dose DA/IDA followed by 12 days DEC of dosage
of 6mg/kg body weight daily to be consumed
after meal.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Chapter-7
MORBIDITY MANAGEMENT & DISABILITY
PREVENTION (MMDP)
-
Lymphoedema and Hydrocele are chronic manifestations of LF, occurring due to progressive and
repeated acute attacks.
-
The goal of MMDP programme is to provide access to essential care package for every person with
lymphoedema or hydrocele in LF endemic areas.
-
Essential care package includes management of lymphedema, treatment of acute ADL, surgery for
hydrocele and treatment for any remaining LF infection.
-
The backlog of hydrocele cases pending for surgery should be cleared as early as possible. Lymphoedema
management through home-based care also needs to be strengthened.
7.1 Introduction
Lymphatic filariasis (LF) endemicity is strongly tied to poverty and leads to debilitating, chronic forms of
morbidity, most notably hydrocele and lymphoedema. In addition, the social impacts of the disease in terms
of physical disfigurement, loss of self-esteem, lowered employment opportunity, interference in sexual activity
and family discord. LF is a disease of low mortality and high morbidity, LF has acute and chronic clinical
manifestations. The acute manifestations are acute adenolymphangitis (ADL), acute filarial lymphangitis and
acute epididymo-orchitis. The chronic manifestations are lymphoedema and hydrocele. Other manifestations
are hematuria, proteinuria, chyluria, chylothorax and tropical pulmonary eosinophilia. Advanced stages of
lymphedema lead to elephantiasis. The most debilitating problem is repeated attacks of acute adenolymphangitis
(ADL) which hastens progression of lymphedema.
7.2 Line Listing and Registration of LF cases
Since lymphoedema is recognizable, information can easily be obtained. The suspected cases line list to be
prepared by ASHAs/DAs during enumeration exercise for mass drug administration every year. This exercise
will include line listing of cases through review of existing information, special surveys, and involvement of
key informants of the area. The community heads, key informers and opinion leaders may also be a source of
information which ASHAs can utilize. It is to be enquired whether any other person in the family or in the
neighborhood also suffers from hydrocele. The suspected cases should be confirmed by the trained Medical
Officer at PHC/CHC/AAM.
Detection and Management of lymphoedema must be a continuous process which needs to be carried out
throughout the year by the general health care paramedical staff, closely monitored by the Medical Officers. The
details are to be compiled at village/sub center/PHC/UPHC/District/State levels including similar compilation
in urban areas. This will be useful to identify high-risk areas and more accurate estimates of the disease burden
could be made. The following flow chart depict the process for LF cases detection and registration:

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

7.2.1 Patient Card
The patient card should be handed over to the patient at the time of examination by a medical officer at their
home or PHCs after registration. With this patient card he/she can contact any other health facilities i.e. DH/
SDH/CHC/PHC/Subcenter for follow up and morbidity management including hydrocelectomy. On the back
of the card, some key messages on morbidity management and prevention of filariasis i.e. steps of morbidity
management in local language to be printed. The format is mentioned in Annexure 6
A duplicate patient’s card should be maintained at the health facility and reconciliation must be conducted
once a year or after enumeration exercise of MDA. If there is any death or lost to follow up of registered cases
or hydrocele surgery performed, LF register must be updated accordingly, and patient’s card of those patients
must be removed from the pool of active patient’s register.
All the verified and confirmed cases of Lymphoedema and hydrocele by the Medical Officer need to be
uploaded on the IHIP portal as per the desired format. A unique ID number for each patient will be auto
generated in the IHIP portal for tracking the individual cases and avoiding duplicate entries.
There shall be two ELF Registers, one each for Lymphoedema and Hydrocele. Alternatively, if case load is less,
one register may be divided into two sections – one for Lymphoedema and one section for Hydrocele. The LF
Register details for Lymphedema and Hydrocele are provided under Annexure 6 (A &B) and the same data
needs to be uploaded in LF-IHIP portal.
All information regarding patients of Lymphatic Filariasis must be stored at block PHCs for at least 5 years
or till the process of dossier preparation and validation of elimination is completed (whichever is later). Each
district/IU must report MMDP activities monthly on 5th working day of every month to the state and state
must submit monthly report to Directorate of NCVBDC on 7th working day of every month on the prescribed
formats given in annexures 10.10 and 10.11.

Village/Ward
Sub Center
Block/UPHC/ PHC Level
Patient directly
visited/reported at Sub
Center and seen by
ANMs must be reported
to Block
PHC/UPHC/CHC/
Ayushman Arogya
Mandir.
Primary screening and
line listing of cases by
ASHA/DAs using
flash card for
identification of cases.

Inform the families
and affected persons
about home-based
morbidity
management and
about surgery for
hydrocele and its
advantages.

List to be shared with
ANM of concerned
Health Sub Center.
Line list shared by
ASHAs must be
verified by
ANM/HWs and
submit to
PHC/UPHC/CHC/
Ayushman Arogya
Mandir for
confirmation.

Patients will be
registered after
confirmation of
diagnosis and
grading of
lymphedema cases
by medical officer.

Patient’s detail
should be filled in
the LF Register at
block level and
IHIP portal.
Each patient to be
issued the patient
card and entered in
register.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

7.3 Staging and Grading of Lymphoedema cases
Staging of Lymphoedema cases must be conducted at the time of verification of LF cases and must be recorded
accordingly on the patient card and LF register.

The following table 7.3.1 provides details of Staging of Lymphoedema
Stage
Description of condition
Illustration
Stage 1
Swelling/lymphoedema totally reversible overnight, Skin soft &
smooth, Pitting oedema, No entry lesion, No acute attack
Stage 2
Lymphoedema with normal skin, Swelling is not reversible
overnight
Stage 3
Swelling/lymphoedema is not reversible, Shallow skin folds
present (the base of the fold should be visible when the patient
moves the limb) Skin thickened, Entry lesion may be seen,
Acute attack may occur
Stage 4
Swelling/lymphoedema not reversible, Knobs (bumps and
lump present), Skin thickened, Shallow folds may be seen,
Entry lesion may be seen, Acute attack commonly occur
Stage 5
Swelling not reversible, Deep skin fold present (the base is not
visible when the patient moves the limb but may be visible
when separated by finger), Skin thickened, Shallow folds/knobs
may be seen, Entry lesions common, Acute attacks common
Stage 6
Swelling not reversible, Warty (Mossy) appearance, Shallow/
deep folds and knobs may be seen, Entry lesions common,
Acute attacks common large swelling, incapacitated (in absence of ADL)
Stage 7
Irreversible requiring help for routine activities/may be bed
ridden

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Table 7.3.2 Summary of Grades based on stages.
Grade
Description
Corresponding
7 stages
Illustration
Mild
Lymphedema without
folds, may or may not
be reversible
Stage 1&2
Moderate
Lymphedema with
shallow folds
Stage 3
Severe
Lymphoedema with
skin changes (mossy
lesions, knobs, and/or
deep folds)
Stage 4-7

Reversible
Not reversible
Shallow folds
fold
Knobs
Deep
folds
Mossy
lesions
Incapacitated
Periodical assessments need to be conducted and these findings should be recorded systematically in the
patient card and the register. The details are also to be entered in the IHIP portal for each patient.
7.4 Morbidity Management and Disability Prevention
The goals of MMDP are to alleviate suffering in people with acute attacks, lymphoedema and hydrocele and
to improve their quality of life. The aim is to provide access to the recommended essential package of care
to every person with these manifestations in all the areas with known patients (lymphoedema/hydrocele).
The MMDP programme of WHO envisages 100% geographic coverage of services in all areas of the endemic
countries with known patients.
The recommended essential package of care includes:
-
Treating acute attacks: Treating episodes of ADL among people with lymphoedema or elephantiasis.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Managing lymphoedema: Preventing debilitating, painful episodes of acute attack and progression of
lymphoedema.
-
Managing hydrocele: Providing access to hydrocele surgery; and
-
Providing antifilarial medicines: to destroy any remaining worms and microfilariae by mass drug
administration or individual treatment for LF infection.
7.4.1 Lymphoedema Management
Lymphedema is usually seen in legs, hands, and rarely breasts and genitalia. During infective mosquito
bite, L3 stage larvae go to the lymphatics and develop into adult worms. These adult worms live in nests
within the lymphatic and causes dilatation of lymphatics. This dilatation results in lymphatic dysfunction
and accumulation of fluid, exudation of lymph and oedema. Subsequent fibrosis results in dermatosclerosis
and lymphoedema. Fibrosis is sometimes progressive, causing folded skin with deep creases; nodules, warty
growths, papillomatosis, hyperpigmentation, and hypertrichosis (elephantiasis). This is the most severe form
of disease.
Filaria patients with damaged lymphatic vessels often have more bacteria on the skin than usual. The large
number of bacteria on the skin, multiple skin lesions, slow lymph fluid movement and the reduced ability of
the lymph nodes to filter the bacteria cause inflammation characteristic of an acute attack. Repeated bacterial
infections precipitate frequent acute attacks, which further damage the tiny lymphatic vessels in the skin,
reducing their ability to drain fluid. This vicious cycle continues, aggravating the condition of the patient.
The effective lymphedema management measures are as following:
1. Hygiene measures
2. Skin and wound care
3. Exercise
4. Elevation of limb
5. Wearing comfortable footwear
1. Hygiene Measures
Good hygiene and treatment of entry lesions are important measures for managing lymphoedema. The patients
should be encouraged to practice skin care and hygiene.
Supplies needed.
-
Clean water at room temperature
-
Soap (least expensive soap without perfume)
-
Bucket/Basin and mug
-
Antibacterial cream (as per the requirement)
-
Footwear within easy reach
-
Towel
Additional materials sometimes needed:
Lymphoedema patients may have open sores, entry lesions, infected areas, or even fungal infection. Any
form of bacterial or fungal infection may require anti-fungal or antibiotic creams for management. Patients
requiring antibiotics or anti-fungal creams need to be referred to the nearest health facility for examination
and evaluation. The health facility will provide the required antibiotics or anti-fungal as per the examination
and assessment.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Check skin for
-
Entry lesions, including very small lesions between the toes and between the folds if any that can hardly
be seen.
-
Entry lesions between the toes may cause itching. Scratching can further damage the skin and can provoke
an acute attack; tell patients to avoid scratching.
-
Toenails should be trimmed in such a way that the skin is not injured. Do not try to clean under the nails
with sharp objects as these can cause entry lesions.
-
It is important to check the skin every time the leg is washed because entry lesions allow bacteria to enter
the skin, and this will cause acute attacks. If entry lesions are found, they should be cleaned carefully.
Wash the leg.
-
Wash your hands before beginning.
-
Wet the leg with clean water at room temperature. Do not use hot water to
wash your leg.
-
Lather the soap in the hand or a clean cloth and start washing from the highest
point of swelling (usually around knee).
-
Wash down the leg towards the foot.
-
Gently clean between all skin folds and between the toes, preferably using a
small cloth or cotton swab, and paying particular attention to the entry lesions.
Brushes or any abrasive material should not be used as they can damage the
skin.
-
Rinse with clean water.
-
Repeat this careful washing until the rinse water is clean.
-
Wash the other leg in the same way, even if it looks normal.
-
If both legs have lymphedema, wash the leg with higher grade of higher
lymphoedema first.
-
Dry the skin.
-
Pat the area lightly with a clean towel.
-
Do not rub hard because this can cause damage to the skin. Carefully dry
between the toes and between skin folds using a small cloth, gauze or cotton
swab.
-
Wet areas between the toes, skin folds and entry lesions promote bacterial and
fungal growth leading to frequent acute attacks.
Washing and drying should be done daily, ideally both morning and at night.
2. Skin and Wound Care
Protect skin from injury and use washing as an opportunity to identify and address entry lesions. Intact skin
provides an effective barrier against infection. Care should be taken to protect the skin from injury and treat
wounds. entry lesions should be managed using antibiotics or antifungal creams as prescribed by the Medical
Officer that help to prevent fungal infections in deep skin folds and in interdigital spaces. Nails should be kept
clean. Do not pop, open, cut blisters or damage the skin. Seek care at a health care facility, if an entry lesion has
drainage, a foul odor, redness or swelling, or if a fever develops.
3. Exercise
Exercise is useful for patients with lymphoedema and in general, the more they exercise the better they are.
Exercise helps by pumping the fluid and improving drainage. However, patients should not exercise during
acute attack. The affected area should be exercised regularly with low-intensity movement of the joints to
promote lymphatic flow. Besides walking short distances, simple exercises can be done.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Standing:
-
Up on the toes exercise
-
Stand with both feet slightly apart, holding on to a wall, a person or other support.
-
Raise on to the toes of both feet at the same time and then sink back down to flat
feet.
-
Repeat 5-15 times or as often as comfortably.
-
If the patient is unable to raise both feet at the same time, the exercise can be
done one foot at a time.
Sitting or lying down
Toe point exercise
-
While sitting or lying down, point your toes towards the floor.
-
Then bend (extend) the toes upwards.
-
Repeat 5-15 times or as often as comfortably.
-
Repeat with the other leg.
Sitting or lying down
Circle exercise.
-
While sitting or lying down, move the foot in a circle to the right and to the left.
-
Repeat with the other leg.
-
If sitting on the floor, protect the heel with a flat pillow.
The exercise can be done at any time but the best time to do the exercise is in the morning before getting up
from bed as this will be the time when the edema will be minimal.
4. Elevation
Elevation of affected limbs is important for patients with lymphoedema
of the leg. It helps prevent fluid from accumulating and enhance drainage
of fluid. The affected area should be raised at night and when possible,
during the day to promote lymphatic flow.
The knee: The knee should be slightly bent, and a pillow should be placed
under the knee for support. While sitting: Raise the foot as high as is
comfortable, preferably as high as the hip. If sitting on the floor, place
a small pillow under the knees. Legs could be elevated during regular
activities like work, leisure, or breast feeding. While lying down, the foot
can be raised by placing a pillow under the mattress. Do not elevate legs
on any surface with sharp edges. Patients with heart problems should not
elevate their legs unless advised by a doctor.
5. Wearing a protective footwear
Comfortable footwear adapted to the size and shape of the foot should be worn to
protect the feet against injury. Proper footwear protects feet from injury. Too tight
footwear can cause injury and favors acute attack. Patients should avoid footwear
that makes their feet hot and sweaty / are too tight.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

7.4.2 Prevention and Cure of Entry Lesions
Entry lesions are any break in the skin that allows bacteria to enter the body.
Entry lesions are common in patients with lymphoedema and are most
frequently found between the toes and deep skin folds and around the toenails.
Entry lesions, such as wounds, can also be found on the surface of the skin.
Both fungi and bacteria can cause entry lesions.
The entry lesions are those lesions favoring entry of bacteria into the skin and
that include injury, fungal infections, wounds, paronychia or infection of nails,
fissures of feet and even insect bite. Fungal infections between the toes or the
folds, between nodules frequently cause itching and people tend to scratch and
damage the skin and create entry lesion for bacteria to enter the body resulting in an acute attack. Fungal
infection per se will not directly result in an acute attack. Fungi and bacteria can cause bad odor.
Treatment for entry lesions: Antifungal and antibacterial creams can be used for local application along
with good hygiene and treatment of entry lesions are important measures for managing lymphoedema. The
patients should be encouraged to practice skin care and hygiene and to use proper footwear. The reduction in
the frequency of acute attacks is an indication that the patient’s condition is improving.
Fungal infections: Fungal infections are usually white or pink in color and do not leak fluid. Bacterial
infections may leak fluid that is thin and clear or thick and colored.
Antifungal and antibacterial creams: After washing and drying, if there are interdigital fungal infection,
antifungal ointments can be applied. If there are any injuries or cuts and wounds antibacterial cream can be
applied if needed.
7.4.3 Management of Acute Attacks
Acute attack:
The presence of adult filarial worms in the human body can result in inflammation of the lymphatic system,
which can cause lymphangitis and lymphadenitis. This can make the lower limbs especially vulnerable to
recurrent bacterial infections. These secondary infections can trigger Acute Dermato-Lymphangio-Adenitis
(ADLA), which is also known as “acute attacks” or ADL. These attacks are the most common symptom of
lymphatic filariasis (LF) and can significantly contribute to the progression of lymphedema.
Due to a damaged lymphatic system, patients with lymphoedema have frequent attacks of infections causing
high fever and severe pain. Patients may be bed-ridden for several days, and normal routine activities become
difficult. An acute attack of infection is painful. The patient may complain of fever, nausea, headache, pain and
tenderness in the affected limb and soreness of the lymph glands. Most patients can easily care for their acute
attacks at home. The reduction in the frequency of acute attacks is an indication that the patient’s condition
is improving. An acute attack is painful. The patient should rest and elevate the leg comfortably as much as
possible at home.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Management of acute attack is as follows:
-
Antibiotics
in
the
mainstay
of
treatment of acute attack since this is
caused by bacterial infection. Usually,
oral antibiotics will suffice. If patient
has co-morbidities and severe infection
parenteral antibiotics may be required
and patient should be hospitalized.
-
Analgesics
and
anti-inflammatory
drugs should be given as per the
intensity of symptoms.
-
A cloth soaked in water and placed
around the leg can relieve pain. The leg
can be soaked in bucket of cold water.
-
The leg should be washed with soap and clean water, gently and carefully.
-
After drying, antiseptics can be applied to the skin around the entry lesions or soreness, if any.
-
The patient should drink plenty of water.
Don’t during Acute Attack phase.
-
No exercise during an acute attack as it is painful.
-
DO NOT treat with anti-filarial medications during the attack.
-
DO NOT pop, open or cut blisters or damage the skin.
-
DO NOT bandage.
Referral Criteria: Patients, with any of the signs listed below, should be seen by a doctor or to be referred to a
primary health care unit when:
-
There is concern for non- filarial lymphedema.
-
The acute attack is accompanied by confusion, vomiting or high fever.
-
The patient has an acute attack and is pregnant.
-
Fever, shaking, chills, or pain in the leg that does not respond to treatment within 24 hours.
-
The patient has an acute attack that does not improve after 48 hours of administering antibiotics.
-
The patient has an entry lesion with drainage and foul odor as well as redness or swelling, or if fever
develops.
-
Splitting of the skin because of rapid increase in the size of the leg
-
The patient has advanced lymphedema with repeated acute attacks despite the institution of hygiene
measures.
-
The patient needs psychological services.
7.4. 5 Surgical Management of Hydrocele due to LF: Hydrocelectomy
The lack of attention given to hydrocele surgery is compounded by the inadequate access of existing surgical
facilities by hydrocele patients. This is due to reasons such as ignorance, fear of surgery and its consequences,
lack of access to facilities, and the high cost of surgery and hospitalization. The cumulative effect of these
factors and the past complacency in implementing quality morbidity management services has resulted in a
huge backlog of hydrocele cases pending for surgery in the country. It is recommended to plan and organize
periodic hydrocelectomy surgeries to address the backlog.
The signs and symptoms are presented below.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Just like any public health programme, success of hydrocele surgeries depends on a lot of factors beyond
the presence of only surgeons and logistics. It is highly recommended that the health facility, which is made
responsible for planning a hydrocele surgery should be guided for ensuring following:
-
Prior advocacy with hydrocele patients: This not only helps in reducing their fears but also builds their
trust within the health system.
-
Information, Education, and Communication (IEC): using electronic-media, radio, miking,
announcements etc in the concerned villages with hydrocele patients.
-
Screening of scrotal swelling cases for simple uncomplicated hydrocele cases, will help in referring any
high-risk hydrocele patients to district/ sub district facilities wherever such surgeries are performed.
-
Fitness testing for surgery: to be performed by a trained medical officer.
-
Informed consent and pre-operative preparations: to be completed before beginning of surgery. Prior
discussion with concerned surgeon and anesthetist will help in ensuring that all necessary logistics are
available before surgery begins, including anesthesia.
-
Immediate post-operative monitoring to avoid complications.
-
Post-surgical observations: to be recorded. This not only helps in quality follow-up of patients but also
helps in documenting lessons learnt.
-
Discharge: health staff should be aware of the minimum procedures to be completed as part of the discharge
process.
-
Review and follow up of persons underwent hydrocele surgery.
Since all precautions are required before the surgery and therefore the surgeries should be done after adequate
microplanning, where at least surgical facilities and anesthetist are available.
Figure 7.8: Flow chart to guide hydrocele management1
1WHO SEA Region guideline on “Morbidity management and disability prevention in Lymphatic Filariasis” 2013

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Patient Information
A patient information pamphlet based on the following suggestions will help minimize the possibility of
patient dissatisfaction after surgery. Informed consent should be obtained from the patient after informing
him of the benefits, expected outcome, and side-effects of the procedure. The patient should know that:
-
He has a condition which can be cured by a simple surgical procedure with minimal and minor side
effects.
-
There is a likelihood of some swelling after the surgery. The swelling may last for a few weeks before the
scrotum becomes normal in size.
-
He must take the medication prescribed by the surgeon as per the schedule advised and for the duration
recommended.
Trainings
Training should include training in lymphedema management and treatment of ADL. The state should
identify trainers for training surgeons/medical doctors. This is an important step to create a pool of trained
medical officers who can actively participate in carrying out hydrocelectomy periodically as per the outreach
plan. The profile of the trainers usually is qualified surgeons with experience in hydrocele surgery working
in endemic areas (they could also be surgeons attached to teaching or training institutions with continued
experience of hydrocele surgery). The identified medical officers need to be trained by the master trainer on
case demonstration and actual surgery need not be performed during the training, Surgery protocol etc. It
is recommended that every LF endemic district should identify physicians/surgeons who need to be trained
in carrying out hydrocele surgeries. These identified PHC/UPHC/CHC medical officers should be trained in
performing diagnosis, testing for fitness for surgery, all aspects of protocol for surgery, post- operative care,
and follow-up.
Programme Norms
To strengthen hydrocele management, Government of India has provisioned INR 750.00 for each hydrocele
operation and INR 500.00 for supplying “morbidity management kit” to each lymphoedema case under state
PIPs of NHM. The incentive for hydrocelectomy is flexible and can be used to support transportation of
patients, wage loss, mobilization incentive to ASHA or FLW, wage loss cost for accompanying attendant or
medicines kits for the patient’s post-surgery.
States are encouraged to utilize the provision of hydrocelectomy surgery under PMJAY scheme of Ayushman
Bharat for eligible beneficiaries, wherein there is a provision of Rs.5000/. for unilateral hydrocelectomy.
(https://pmjay.gov.in/sites/default/files/2020-01/HBP_2.0-For_Website_V2.pdf)
The LF endemic states to ensure training to Lymphoedema patients about foot care in terms of washing,
drying, simple foot exercise and taking care of entry lesion etc. that will go a long way to help Lymphoedema
patients. A budget of Rs 500 is provided for MMDP kits. All Lymphoedema cases should be given “morbidity
management kit” free of cost containing a plastic bucket, mug, soap, towel. The states have also been advised
to develop a plan for morbidity management activity, as mentioned above, and execute it thoroughly. The
support from medical colleges is crucial in MMDP services, and training.
Disability and entitlements: Rights of Persons with Disability Act
The Gazette of GOI, by Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment [Department of Empowerment of Persons
with Disabilities (Divyangjan)] New Delhi, dated 4th January 2018.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

As per the Persons with Disability Act (RPwD Act), the locomotor/physical disability due to primary or
secondary lymphoedema qualifies for disability certificate. Under the rule, the scoring of lymphoedema has
been included with its 4 Grades.
The States to consider facilitating with concerned authorities in issuing disability certificates to all patients
with Lymphoedema Grade 3 and Grade 4 presenting with locomotor/physical disability and support them to
access the benefits.
Some of the state Governments are already providing financial assistance for cases of lymphatic filariasis. For
instance, Andhra Pradesh is providing financial assistance of Rs. 5000/- for bilateral elephantiasis- Grade-IV
patients under YSR Pension Kanuka Scheme, Telangana is providing monthly pension of Rs. 2016/- to GradeII onwards filariasis affected persons under the Aasara Pension Scheme and Tamil Nadu is providing Rs.
1000/- for Grade-III & IV lymphatic filariasis cases.
The responsibility matrix of health staff for MMDP is shown below:
Responsible person
Responsibility
Action
ASHA (early Referral,
case detection
of LF cases)
-
High suspicion of early case of
lymphedema during regular surveys
-
Identify fever with lymphangitis,
swollen and tender lymph node, LF
endemic area.
-
Enquiry about scrotal swelling
patients in endemic area from family
members.
-
Home based management and follow
up of the cases
-
Refer to nearest HWC/PHC for slide
collection for diagnosis and early
treatment.
-
Management of acute attacks of
lymphangitis
ASHA
(Chronic LF cases)
-
Prepare and update the list of
suspected cases of lymphedema and
hydrocele.
-
Train all the lymphedema patients on
lymphedema management measures
at home or HWC/PHC
-
Regular follow up to assess the
practice of lymphedema management
and use of MMDP kits during the
routine field visits.
-
Motivate and counsel the hydrocele
patient to undergo surgical
intervention and explain the benefits
to him and family members.
-
Recording the data on progress of
MMDP activities in standard format.
-
Refer to nearest HWC/SC/PHC for
validation and confirmation of early
lymphedema case.
-
Follow up cases.
-
Counselling of patients
-
Record keeping and documentation

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Responsible person
Responsibility
Action
Ayushman Arogya
Mandirs
-
Collect night blood smear slides of the
suspected cases for early diagnosis of
LF.
-
Treatment of positive cases to prevent
chronic disability.
-
MMDP care to chronic lymphedema
cases and facilitate distribution of the
MMDP kits.
-
Examination and counselling of
hydrocele cases for surgery
-
Follow up of the Mf positive cases and
chronic LF cases.
-
Refer to PHC/CHC as per the
requirement for further management.
-
Selective Microfilaria carrier
treatment with treated with Directly
Observed Single dose of DA or IDA
as per the MDA regimen followed
by standard treatment with DEC of
dosage 6mg/Kg body weight daily
for 12 days to be consumed after the
meal.
-
Organize camps at AAM-HSC/village
level by mobilizing the Lymphoedema
cases and demonstrate home based
care with self-care practices and use of
MMDP kits.
-
Treatment of Mild & uncomplicated
Acute Phase Illness like Acute
Lymphangitis (acute attacks) at
H&WC
-
Conduct Weekly fever clinics and
rapid tests of all fever cases.
-
Community mobilization for MDA
and Night Blood Surveys
PHC level
Medical Officer
-
Diagnosis of early LF cases
-
Follow up of the asymptomatic and
chronic LF cases.
-
Treatment of positive case to prevent
chronic disability.
-
Treatment and management of acute
attacks
-
Verification of the suspected chronic
cases and grading of LF disability.
-
Documentation of patient records.
-
MMDP care to chronic lymphedema
cases and facilitate distribution of the
MMDP kits.
-
Examination and counselling of
hydrocele cases for surgery and refer.
-
Fixed days for conducting hydrocele
surgeries in camp mode.
-
Refer to CHC/ DH as pe the
requirement for further management.
-
Undertake training for FLW on
MMDP care.
-
Review the cases of LF for grading
disability.
-
Identify, treat acute attacks and its
complications and report activities.
-
Identify, manage lymphoedema and
its complications and report activities.
-
Ensure availability of supplies for
MMDP Care to patients.
-
Perform safe hydrocelectomy or
-
Identify patients who require surgery,
refer to hospital and report activities
District Hospitals/Medical
Colleges – Medical
Officers/Head/Professors
of Medicine, Surgery, and
dermatology
-
Treatment of recurrent ADLs/Acute
attacks and complicated cases
-
Surgery for Hydrocele cases referred
by PHC/UHCs
-
Trainings on MMDP care to medical
officers

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Chapter-8
THE SOCIAL AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE (SBC)
AND ADVOCACY FOR ELF
-
Leveraging and layering existing channels and platforms for engagement of allied departments for
intersectoral convergence.
-
Customized Communication for the communities to enhance consumption of anti-filarial drugs.
-
Advocacy activities to promote commitment of key leaders at the national, state and district levels and
continuous focus on the LF elimination program.
8.1: Introduction
The Social and Behavior Change Approach to accelerate the
elimination of LF: Social and Behavior Change (SBC) is an essential
component in Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis programme.
SBC is important for building enabling environment prior to the
MDA rounds and prepare the communities to consume anti filarial
drugs. As the endemic areas are diverse and have existing resources
in the form of platforms and channels, it is essential to develop the
social mobilization plan aligned to the local culture and context.
Under the ELF these SBC strategies are undertaken as a holistic
approach to witness sustained behavior change:
1. Community Centered Behavior Change Communication to influence knowledge, attitudes, and
practices at the individual and family level.
2. Social Mobilization to foster wider participation, leverage the existing platforms and channels for
collective action, and enhance ownership and change community norms.
3. Advocacy to create an enabling environment to secure leadership commitment and raises resources.
8.2 SBC activities
MDA comprises of three phases, pre-MDA, MDA, and post MDA. Of these, pre- MDA is most opportune
time to inform and influence every individual/family and motivate them for consumption of anti-filarial drugs
in front of the Drug Administrator.
8.2.1 SBC activities during Pre MDA phase:
Enumeration in the Pre MDA phase, the first opportunity to reach the
households with the key awareness messages about LF and MDA. The FrontLine Workers (FLWs)/Drug Administrator (DA) should communicate to
the household about filaria and preventive drugs along with the date of
MDA. FLW/DA must carry a communication tool (flashcard/ brochure/
FAQ) to communicate effectively and firmly answer the questions raised by
the families in her catchment areas. For the enumeration, the DA should
have family register. During the enumeration, the DAs should do IPC
Figure 8.1

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

sessions with the family members with focus on the members who had not consumed anti filarial drugs or had
not adhered to DOT.
Timely printing of Information, Education, and Communication (IEC):
A tool kit is developed by NCVBDC with multiple IEC materials, prototype is shared with the states in advance.
States should feel free to develop additional IECs to address the prevalent myths and misconceptions prevalent
in the local communities to motivate the community to take the right actions.
A specific IEC plan should be developed at block and district level
considering the number of facilities, front line workers/DAs, along with
the suggested time and place for displaying the same.
IEC material should be made available at the block level at least one month
before the MDA. Every DA should carry enough print materials. During
DAs’ training a session should be conducted on the effective use of these
materials.
Every block/IU should be given enough IEC materials which should be
used to provide to the key influencers and key platforms like schools,
women collectives, panchayat leaders, etc. Banners can be displayed in the
key places in the targeted rural and urban areas to inform people about
dates of MDA and provide related information.
The digital IEC materials should be shared with all the existing media and social media channels. IEC
dissemination plan should be developed at block, district and state level in advance to leverage all the existing
channels engaging the Information Officers at the state and district levels. The suggested IEC materials with
purpose are mentioned in below table 8.1.
Table 8.1 Suggestive usage of the existing IEC materials
Name of the material
Where it can be used
Poster
It can be used in district/block headquarter, prominent public places like market, schools
etc. in village
Flip book on MMDP
To educate the patients and their family members and during demonstrations by frontline
workers
Brochure on MDA
Drug administrators can use at the booth and house to house drug administration to
enhance Interpersonal Communication
Handbill
Can be used to support PRI members, SHG members, schoolteachers, and other
influencers in the community
Banner on MDA
It can be used in district/block headquarters, prominent public places like markets,
schools etc. in villages. It can also be used for miking as part of urban mobilization.
Television Commercial on
MDA
It can be used in cinema halls, local cable, social media and WhatsApp groups or other
platforms.
Audio announcement
content
It can be used by the religious leaders, PRI leaders and for miking especially in the
urban areas
Sankalp
It can used in the schools, women collectives/NSS cadets, various departments at the
district and block level
Awareness Songs
It can be used for miking, wherever the public announcement system is available.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Name of the material
Where it can be used
Videos by eminent Leaders
It can be used in cinema halls, local cable, social media, and WhatsApp groups of SM
and other platforms.
Video on ASHA training
It can be used during Drug Administrators trainings where MDA is conducted with
double/triple drug Video on MMDP focusing on MMDP care
Animated videos (Do
you Know Series)
It can be used for DA trainings, meetings with the platform leaders, DCC, SBC
meetings (if time permits), WhatsApp messages for the community cadres,
officers, and students.
Animated videos,
posters and GIFs on
mosquitoes
It can be used for DA trainings, meetings with the platform leaders, WhatsApp
messages for the community cadres, officers and students.
For further reference, you can download SBC, IEC and training material at:
https://ncvbdc.mohfw.gov.in/index1.php?lang=1&level=1&sublinkid=5828&lid=3802
Media sensitization workshops: Organize media workshops
at the state and district level, collaborating with the Health
Department and experts. The aim is to ready the media to go
beyond daily reporting, sensitizing them to the issues, clearing
misconceptions, and addressing doubts. The workshops
should be organized for three to four hours, ensuring they
are both interesting and stimulating. Allow communities,
including patients and beneficiaries, to share their experiences.
Develop media materials, including program fact sheets,
FAQs, backgrounders, and event or issue releases.
Media briefings: Organize small media briefings with 4 to 6
journalists for specific spaces and slots (prime talk shows, panel
discussions, interviews, op-ed) to shape content that is both
appropriate for the spaces they are writing for and can present
the information with both accuracy and understanding.
Be ready to shape multimedia content: Learn to shape a variety of content to engage different audiences,
such as news reports, video documentaries, infographics, scripts for roleplays and radio and community radio
programs and podcasts.
Prepare for Crisis Communications: Have a crisis communication plan in place for any negative outcomes
or public backlash related to LF elimination efforts. Promptly and transparently address issues to maintain
public trust.
Sustain Engagement and Momentum: Keep the issue alive in the media by providing regular updates, share
achievements, and reminding the public and program stakeholders of the ongoing need for support until LF
is eliminated.
Develop a “communication campaign plan” there should be a communication campaign plan leveraging all
the paid and unpaid channels. It is recommended to consider the local dance and drama division, information
officer and execute the plan.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Conduct inter-sectoral convergence meeting: To achieve desired level of DOC, it is essential that each
household have advance information about the MDA dates. Programme should coordinate and engage wide
range of platforms, partners, and allies at various levels to raise awareness about the disease, prevention, and
available services.
To augment the effect of social mobilization and sustain through system, the programme should trigger
innovative engagement and partnerships with ministries government flagship programmes, development
partners, social groups, corporate and private sectors, academic institutions, and promote inter-sectoral
convergence. Every block and panchayat should map all the platforms and reach out to them with key messages
on the disease, vector and significance of preventive drugs through the mobilization team placed at the block
and panchayat level.
Below figure 8.1 elaborates the ministries which have last mile connectivity, and its concerned platforms/
programmes which could be leveraged for an effective MDA mobilization.
Figure 8.1 : Engagement of allied departments
Engagement of the District Magistrates/Collectors: The District Magistrate (DM)/District Collector (DC)
plays a vital role in accelerating the Mass Drug Administration. The DM/DC should be engaged in chairing
the District Coordination Committee Meeting to ensure involvement of all concerned departments and
organizations in MDA. They also should conduct frequent review meetings prior for preparation review and
during the MDA.
The following are the suggested Activities for effective engagement of the above referred platforms:
Platform: Schools
Activities:
-
Advisory for schools to conduct drug administration after Mid-Day
Meals in all the schools.
-
Motivated to attend the State/district Task Force Meeting.
-
Instruct all the Block Education officer (BEOs) to conduct the Pre MDA
mobilization activities in all the schools of the endemic blocks and ask
BEOs to report back to the district.
-
Special instructions are released for the schools in the urban areas for
MDA mobilization.
-
Facilitate orientation of all the BEOs on integrated MDA and NDD.
-
Attend District Coordination Committee Meeting.
-
Share the LF related communication materials with all the principals/
head teachers.
-
LF discussions in morning assembly.
-
Essay writing/drawing competition in schools prior to MDA on LF and
vector control.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Platform: Anganwadi Centres
Activities:
-
Issue directives to the DPOs /CDPOs to support the LF elimination
programme and integrated MDA and NDD
-
Orient the DPOs on LF elimination Programme and integrated MDA and
NDD.
-
Issue advisory to conduct mass drug consumption at AWC for children
over 2 years.
-
Attend the State Task Force Meeting and Block Coordination Committee
meetings.
-
Support the MMDP activities.
-
Sector supervisor to orient the AWWs on integrated MDA and NDD
activities along with reporting.
-
Share the LF related communication materials with all the AWWs.
Platform: Federated Women SHGs
Activities:
-
Issue advisory to the endemic states to support the LF elimination
programme and the connect between nutrition- MDA-NDD.
-
Issue advisory to the DPMs to support the LF elimination programme,
District Programme Manager to orient all the BPMs on their roles in LF
elimination programme.
-
Attend the State/District/Block Task Force Meeting.
-
Issue a date in coordination with district VBD team to conduct mass drug
consumption in the women collectives (SHGs/Village Organizations/
Cluster Level Federations).
-
BPM to orient all the Community Mobilizers (CM) for MDA mobilization
activities.
-
Ensure mass drug consumption and women to ensure drug consumption
among her eligible family members and in her neighborhood.
Platform: Panchayat Leaders
Activities:
-
Issue advisory for the states to support the LF elimination programme.
-
Orient the District Panchayati Raj Officers and Block Developmental
Officers (BDOs) on the LF elimination programme and effective
engagement of the BDOs in MDA mobilization, sanitation activities and
support the MMDP activities. Attending the State /District Task Force
Meeting.
-
BDO to orient all the panchayat mukhiyas and secretaries on their role in
MDA mobilization, inauguration of MDA by consuming anti LF drugs in
public (report back to BDO).
-
Share the LF related communication materials with all the Panchayat
Mukhiyas.
-
Review the drug administration status in the panchayat by calling a
meeting with the DAs.
-
Panchayat Mukhiya to ensure wall writing.
-
Panchayat to organize a filaria gosthi in their respective areas to sensitize
community on MDA and benefits of anti-filarial drugs.
-
Panchayat Mukhiya to inaugurate campaign by consuming drugs in
presence of community stakeholders.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Platform: NSS/NYK/NCC Volunteers
Activities:
-
To issue directives to all the concerned NSS coordinators of colleges/
Universities
-
Conduct awareness activities in the college/university premises.
-
Organize booth at the college/university premises for mass drug
consumption.

Platform: PDS Dealers
Activities:
-
Issue directives to the District Supply Officer to support the MDA
mobilization, blocks to engage the PDS dealers for MDA mobilization by
displaying the IEC and informing the communities about MDA and LF
prevention.
-
Share the LF related communication materials with all the PDS dealers.
-
Support the DAs to convince the refusal families.
-
PDS dealers put one MDA banner/poster at her/his shop for awareness
generation.
-
PDS dealer to tell MDA benefits to the community on the day of ration
distribution.
Platform: Tribal department /Schools and SHGs
Activities:
-
Engage schools/residential schools and SHGs for informing the
households about the MDA dates and LF.
-
Organize booths at schools and hostels.
-
Engage local structures of tribals under tribal welfare department.
Platform/Program: Urban Bodies
Activities:
-
Municipal Commissioner issues advisory-for the sanitation team to
support the MDA mobilization, carry out vector control activities in
wards with sanitation drives.
-
The Nagar Nigam leaders/ward members should be made accountable
for improved coverage and compliance in their geographical areas. They
should coordinate with the resident welfare associations as well as the
local leaders in the slum areas.
-
National Urban Livelihood Mission issues instruction for mass drug
consumption in all the SHGs.
-
NHM has promoted Arogya samitis, NULM promotes women collectives,
these platforms should be leveraged to inform the communities about the
key messages on MDA.
-
DM/DC issues instruction to all the Resident Welfare Associations for
arranging MDA booth and ensure all the residents consume anti filarial
drugs.
-
Unit heads organize mass drug consumption in the universities and
colleges and report back to the district.
Platform: Railway Stations
Activities:
-
Run announcements about the disease and MDA dates and places of availability of drugs.
-
Allow the DA teams to conduct MDA activity in railway colonies and booths in the railway hospitals.
-
Display banners and posters about the MDA dates

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Training of the DAs and Supervisors on SBC: IPC is a specific skill, it requires training. During DA/
Supervisors training, a session on effective IPC should be conducted. It is recommended to have role plays
to enhance the confidence of DAs and supervisors. All the DAs and Supervisors should have a copy of FAQs
and relevant communication tool. Which will enable them to respond to the questions raised by the hesitant
families and covert the refusals.
A session on social mobilization- elaborating on leveraging existing channels and platforms also should be
added in the training.
Session on refusal conversion: As the program promotes and focuses on DOC, the number of refusing
individuals and families will increase. The programme should prepare the DAs and supervisors to manage the
refusals and convince them for DOC using the communication tools promoted by the programme.
Leverage the patient support network: Peer support groups are a proven model to engage the patients and
equip them for their care as well as leverage to mobilize communities for preventive action. A group of people
suffering with lymphedema can form a peer group. Apart from taking care of self, the group can also be
a collective force to be used beyond the ambit of self-care. This network can play a vital role during MDA
campaign for more community acceptance, but also in influencing their peers (people affected by LF) for
regular self-care practices, referring the persons with hydrocele for surgery. They should be provided with
materials, pamphlets or booklets on home-based care and self-care kits.
Engagement of influencers (religious leaders, health service providers):
Basis the communities, it is recommended to identify the influencers and
sensitize them about the disease and motivate them for informing the
communities about the disease and MDA. They should also be engaged
for convincing the refusals during the MDA.
Engagement Popular public figures like movie stars, national & state level sports personalities help build
public opinion by strengthening perception and raising the communities’ trust in the programme. They
should be regularly engaged to raise awareness about the LF elimination programme, generate demand for
MMDP services, reduce stigma associated with the disease, dispel misconceptions, and encourage community
members to consume preventive drugs. Popular movie and television actors, regional actors, sportspersons,
social media influencers, other community influencers like imams should be engaged through regular meetings
to raise the visibility of LF in the public narrative.
Effective advocacy is critical for creating an environment
that supports programmatic success, thereby ensuring LF
remains a prioritized health issue. This involves engaging
various stakeholders, including political leaders, healthcare
professionals, media, and the affected community, to achieve
specific, predefined outcomes.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Suggestive Advocacy Activities at various levels are mentioned in the below table 8.2.
Level
Activity
Timeline
Responsibility
Target Stakeholders
National
Video Public appeal
by Key Officials
Before MDA round
NCVBDC
Hon’ble Health minister, MoHFW
Hon’ble MoS, Health, MoHFW
Government officials
Experts
National
Media Sensitization
7-10 days before
MDA round
NCVBDC
Media Reporters
State
Engagement
with state health
ministers and
departments
Quarterly
State Programme
Officer
State health departments
State
Media sensitization
7-10 days before
MDA round
State Programme
Officer
Local Media
State Health department
State/
District/ Local
Video Public appeal
by Key champions
Before MDA round
State Programme
Officer/ CMO/
DVBD Officers/
MOIC
Hon’ble State Health ministers
MP/MLA
Mayor
Block Pramukh
Gram Pradhan
Government officials
Experts
Local Celebrities
Community leaders
District/
Local
Media sensitization
7-10 Days before
MDA round
DM/CMO/DVBD
Officers
Local media
Develop social mobilization plan: a comprehensive social mobilization and advocacy plan should be
developed at the district and block level, consolidating all the SBC activities. While developing the social
mobilization plan, it is essential to identify the low consumption areas, high MF rate areas and refusal areas
from the previous MDA round and develop customized mobilization plan for these identified areas.
8.2.2 SBC activities during MDA phase:
MDA Inauguration: to provide visibility to the program, MDA should be inaugurated at all levels- national,
state, district, block and panchayats. It is recommended to involve prominent and influential personalities (eg:
political leaders, local celebrities, DM/DC, BDO, Sarpanch, religious leaders, patients) to inaugurate MDA by
consumption of anti-filarial drugs in public and relay through media and social media.
Mass Drug consumption for assured DOC: all the mapped schools, colleges, offices, women SHGs should be
targeted in a planned manner for mass drug consumption. The programme should coordinate and collaborate
with the concerned officials in advance. Programme should plan for booth, DAs and logistics in advance,
the institutions should be informed in advance for the booth days. The mobilization team should be actively
engaged for this activity. Relevant IEC materials should be supplied, dates should inform the RRT about mass
drug consumption so that they are prepared to support.
Refusal Conversion: mobilization team should develop their daily plans based on the daily coverage report
and support in convincing the refusal individuals/families. While doing the refusal conversion they should
utilize the tools provided by the programme. They should be encouraged to involve the influencers of the
village like panchayat leaders, SHG leaders, religious leaders.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Community champions (People with Lymphoedema and hydrocele) need to be engaged to raise awareness
about the disease and act as influencers. They will encourage community members to consume preventive
drugs, avail MMDP services and address misconceptions associated with the disease and ensure their
meaningful participation in MDA launch ceremonies, media workshops etc. to share experiences about the
disease.
Crisis-focused sensitization: For this the journalists need to be sensitized to all the aspects of the MDA
including adverse reactions. Any events that may occur with vulnerable groups like children should not be
made an emotive issue, instead journalists must be readied to understand reason for occurrence of the event,
how it can be prevented and steps for the management and government’s preparedness on the same.
Media Site visits: Organize media site visits for journalists to educate them on the issue, take them to
programme sites where everything is being implemented optimally from the first to the last step in keeping
with the protocols and guidelines. The process of actual implementation can be demonstrated to the journalists
to educate them the complexity of public health programming and once they are educated, they can help the
programme by educating the public about the intention and commitment of the public health system.
Leverage Social Media Channels: Social media is a potent tool for raising awareness about LF and MDA
rounds during Mass Drug Administration (MDA) rounds, state and district health departments should
disseminate key messages regarding LF and MDA initiatives across their official social media platforms. By
harnessing the expansive reach and influence of social media, the programme aims to extend its outreach to
urban audiences, thereby amplifying awareness and fostering community engagement.
8.3 Focused SBC Activities in Urban areas
Level
Activity
Timeline
Responsibility
Target Stakeholders
National
Launch of Mass Drug
Administration with Hon’ble
Health minister, MoHFW
During MDA
NCVBDC
Govt. Officials, policy
makers, media
State
Mass Drug Administration
(MDA) round launch with
Hon’ble State Health ministers
MDA round
State Programme
Officer
State Health and allied
departments
State/District/
Local
Field visit by local Political
leaders Media Houses and
community leaders
During MDA
round /Post MDA
round
State Programme
Officer/ CMO/
DVBD Officers/
MOIC
MP/MLA
District/Local
Mass Drug Administration
(MDA) round launch with
Hon’ble MP/MLA/ District
Collector
MDA round
CMO/DVBD
Officers/MOIC
MP/MLA
It is observed that consistently, in urban areas the coverage and compliance during MDA are comparatively
low. Low awareness and risk perception about the disease and unavailability of family members during the
DAs visit are key issues in the urban areas. The type of communities in the urban area is wide-ranged- high rise
buildings, colonies, slums, and big private houses; they require customized communication to motivate them
for the consumption of anti-filarial drugs.
Engagement of academic institutions: Students from the universities/colleges (Social Work, Rural
Development, and Public Health) must be engaged for mobilization. They should be oriented to work as the
rapid communication team to handhold the drug administrators.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Engagement of business associations (Vyapar Mandal): They should be mobilized to support communication
materials (banners/posters/video vans). Drug administration through booths in the market can be explored
with the support of the leaders of the Vyapar mandal.
Partnering with the Corporate Social Responsibilities: engage the CSR for mobilization through their existing
programmes or seek support for communication materials in the form of video vans, banners, posters, miking,
Aprons to DAs etc.
Miking in the urban areas: To cover the dense population in the
urban areas, miking should be done at least 3- 4 days before MDA.
A thorough route plan linked with the micro plan must be prepared
and monitored by the urban health facilities. An appealing content
with key preparatory messages like- “consume drugs after eating”,
“dose” etc should be announced.
Print/electronic/social media should be engaged effectively to
reach out to wider communities. Social media content should be
made available through the schools and college groups. Cinema
halls should display TVCs/short videos along with the MDA dates
and drug dose, at least one month before the MDA.
Public Announcement System are available in the mosque, temple,
church, tent house, traffic post, garbage collection vehicles, etc,
audio content should be developed emphasizing the MDA dates,
dose, benefits of anti-filarial drugs, and relayed through these
PA systems. Posters/Banners should be displayed strategically
with larger public exposure. Public transportation- bus, autos,
rickshaws, garbage collection vehicle are some of the potential
display points. Collaborations should also be explored with existing
clubs (Rotary/Lions/Inner wheel), and Indian Medical Association/
Indian Association Pediatrics. Mahila Arogya Samiti should be engaged for mobilization. Recognition for the
best performing blocks and panchayats should also be introduced to motivate the teams.
Engagement of Municipal Commissioner, Mayor, Ward Members and engage them to undertake and
participate in programme review meetings including Urban Task Force Meetings prior to MDA rounds to
ensure effective implementation of programme activities in urban areas, leverage existing social networks and
Resident Welfare Associations (RWAs) to disseminate timely and accurate information and dispel myths and
rumors.
Engaging staff for social mobilization: During the 7th MSG meeting of NHM, to enhance monitoring of
MDA and Social Mobilization in terms of deployment of additional Human Resources to the endemic States
at district, block and panchayat levels is approved for achieving better compliance and support to States during
MDA rounds. The details of additional manpower and the terms of reference for MSG approved additional
support for monitoring and Social Mobilization are below.
The following support is approved to engage during the MDA campaign for duration of three months only.
This additional support will be deployed at district, block, and panchayat levels for facilitating pre-MDA
preparatory activities, monitoring of MDA activities including social mobilisation.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

At district level:
-
District Monitoring Coordinator: One per district @ Rs 35000 per month for three months.
-
District Social Mobilisation Coordinator: At a rate of Rs 1000 per day for three months.
At block level (for ten high risk and priority blocks/IUs/Urban areas of the district only)
-
Block Monitoring Coordinator: One per block @ Rs 10000 per month for 3 months.
-
Block Social Mobilisation Coordinator: One per block @ Rs 12000 per month for 3 months.
At Panchayat and Village level (for ten high risk and priority blocks/IUs /Urban areas of the district only)
-
Supervisor at Village level: Honorarium for supervisors involved in MDA @ Rs.600/- for days of MDA.
-
Social Mobilisation Coordinator at Panchayat level: One per block @ Rs 800 per day for 45 days.
(Note: The criteria for the selection of 10 blocks/IUs in a district: High risk and high priority blocks/IUs/
Urban areas in a district should include: 1) High Mf rate, 2) poor compliance to MDA in last two rounds
3) hard to reach area 4) high level of refusals for MDA drugs)
States are requested to kindly include these positions in the PIPs and adopt the existing procedure for
recruitment by the concerned districts and partners will support in recruitment and training of the staff.
Terms of Reference
1. District Monitoring Coordinator: The District Monitoring Coordinator will coordinate and monitor all
MDA activities (before, during and after) in the district under overall leadership of District Collector and
Chief Medical Officer of the district and will supervise the block level coordinators and will be responsible
for the working and accountability of Block level coordinators during MDA campaign.
Roles and Responsibilities
-
Support the district in preparation of Timeline for District in lieu of state Timeline and ensure procurement
of logistics (Family register, Drugs, reporting formats, marker pens, IEC material)
-
Facilitate district level ToTs and preparation of block level training plan and facilitate DA trainings along
with block monitors.
-
Review and support the district and block level preparedness and Micro plans as per the formats and
update every week on progress with District Magistrate/District officials and ensure inclusion of hot spot
areas and high refusal areas of previous round and planning of activities.
-
Coordinate and facilitate in ensuring logistic distribution (family registers, training materials etc), timely
release of funds, printing material and formats for blocks.
-
Facilitate and track the District Task Force/ District Coordination Committee meeting prior to round,
during round and post round under DM/DC with involvement of other non-health departments.
-
Facilitate district and block level monitoring plan by engaging concerned officials and review the
monitoring plan of block monitors.
-
Collection of data from block monitors and provide real time feedback of Training, Micro planning and
filed survey status.
-
Visit field periodically and Monitoring of teams – 2/ day and Monitoring of block level monitors – 1 each
/ Day.
-
Analyse, consolidate and provide feedback as received from the block monitors and facilitate daily evening
briefing meetings during MDA under chairmanship of CS/CMO/ DHO.
-
Facilitate collection of name wise line lists of Filariasis affected cases (Lymphedema & Hydrocele) from all
blocks and ensure timely submission of 13 table format report of MDA for the District and blocks.
-
Coordinate and support the district officials for engagement of medical colleges for post MDA coverage
evaluation and link hydrocele operations with district/medical colleges.
-
Day to day coordination with local partners for synergistic planning and actions.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Experience and skills required
-
Postgraduate in Public health, social sciences/sociology/any PG degree with experience of coordination,
conducting effective training, monitoring of VBDs, and data management at the district/state level under
health or any development programmes. S/he should have the ability to coordinate with the district leaders-
District Magistrate/Collector, Chief Medical Officer, District Vector Borne Disease Officer, district level
officers. Work experience at district level with programmess like MDAs, pulse polio or in any national
health programmes will be preferred. The identified District Coordinator will be trained by the state in
consultation with the CMO/DVBDO and partners.
Report and Remuneration: The District Coordinator should share daily report in the prescribed formats–
Plan vs Accomplished with the CMO/CS/DMHO and District Magistrate/collector and a copy to State
Programme Officer. Based on the monthly report, Rs 35000 per month will be paid for 3 months from the
CMO office post approval.
2. District Social Mobilization Coordinators: To ensure coordination at the district & block level, the
District Social Mobilisation Coordinator will be deployed at the district level for three months for the
MDA.
Roles and responsibilities
PRE MDA (70 days)
-
Lead the social mobilization component and prepare district mobilization plan.
-
Develop IEC distribution plan for each block based on the number of health facilities and Front-Line
Workers and Coordinate with the IEC, print and mass media division for visibility of MDA campaign.
-
Participate in the District Coordination Committee and Block Coordination Committee meeting
(wherever possible)
-
Facilitate session on Social Mobilization during district Training of Trainers and monitor the block level
training of DAs and supervisors.
-
Assist CMO for timely printing of the family registers, IEC materials and timely availability at the blocks.
-
Coordinate with the Municipal Commissioner and health team and plan for urban mobilization. Prepare
miking plans and urban micro plans. (Miking, hoardings, banners, posters, etc.)
-
Coordinate with all the existing channels and platforms, activate them for MDA mobilization (Self-help
groups, PRI members, teachers, and other influential people)
-
Update the MDA Preparedness and social mobilization efforts to the District Magistrate and other officers
every week and undertake field visits as and when required in consultation with CMO.
-
Collate data from each block and share the status with the concerned district heads/point persons and
share updates from the Block Social Mobilisation Coordinator every week and share the same with the
CMO.
-
Attend all the review and planning meetings at the district and blocks (wherever possible)
DURING MDA (15 days): Review Social Mobilisation concurrent monitoring findings for the blocks and
provide support to the blocks who are showing low coverage.
Attend the evening debriefing and share the findings of concurrent monitoring data ; Analysis of daily refusals,
never treated, missed out areas based on reports and evening meetings.
POST MDA (5 days) - Support the Post MDA Assessment survey on Social Mobilisation.
Experience and skills required
-
Postgraduate in Public health, social sciences/sociology/any PG degree with experience of coordination,
conducting effective training, monitoring of VBDs, and data management at the district/state level
under health or community mobilization programmes. S/he should have the ability to coordinate with
the district leaders- District Magistrate/Collector, Chief Medical Officer, District Vector Borne Disease
Officer, district level officers from rural development, education, panchayat, labour, tribal, minorities and
partners and preference will be given to the persons earlier worked in implementing social and community
mobilisation activities.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Report and Remuneration: The District Social Mobilisation Coordinator should share daily report in the
prescribed formats– Plan vs Accomplished with the CMO/CS/DMHO and District Magistrate/collector
and a copy to State Programme Officer. Based on the monthly report, Rs 1000/- per day will be paid as the
remuneration (monthly) for three months from the CMO office post approval.
S/he will fill in the following reports a) Social Mobilization Base Format within a week of joining b) IEC
distribution plan for each block, c)District mobilization plan, d) Field Monitoring checklist and e)Monthly
reporting format
3. Block Monitoring Coordinator: The Block Monitoring Coordinator will be stationed in the identified
high risk and high priority blocks/IUs/Urban areas of the district and will be working closely with the
PHC/CHC medical officer and his team to support MDA campaign and reports to the District Monitoring
Coordinator and CMO/CS/DMHO.
Key roles and responsibilities
-
Preparation of Timeline for block in lieu of District Timeline.
-
Plan for each batch training of DAs (ASHA, AWW, ANMs) & Supervisors and track absentees and plan
for their trainings.
-
Facilitate Block task force meeting and documentation of minutes and coordination with other department
– Education, ICDS (Anganwadi dept.) & Panchayati Raj / Nagar Nigam.
-
Support the block in preparation and review of Micro plan and ensure printing and distribution of plan to
all teams.
-
Preparation of block level monitoring plan including -poor performing areas as per last round, high
endemic areas, or high MF positive areas
-
Monitoring of MDA activity with focus on hot spot areas and poor performing areas of last round and
plan source reduction activities.
-
Facilitation of preparation of communication plan for high refusal area based on previous round along
with logistic collection from District and timely distribution of logistics to the teams.
-
Block level inauguration facilitation.
-
Monitoring of 4 – 5 teams / day along Rapid convenient monitoring of previous day work from 2nd day of
activity onwards.
-
Facilitate Block level evening meeting under chairmanship of medical officer in charge.Review and
analysis of family registers during evening meeting for missed areas, never treated, refusal, permanently
locked houses etc.
-
Facilitate collection of report and submission to District on daily basis.
-
Planning for mop up post round based on the review of family registers and monitoring of mop up activity.
-
Collection of block specific data asper formats and submission to District.
-
Participation in Community Evaluation Survey activity of medical colleges with target of 2 to 3 cluster per
day.
-
Planning for MMDP activities to be carried throughout the year including linkage of hydrocele operations
to District hospitals / Medical colleges.
-
Ensure timely release of Funds to DAs within 1 week of activity.
-
Daily reporting to concerned MOICs or block level officials and with district coordinator and DMO/
DVBDCO/PO post approval.
Report and Remuneration: The block monitor should share daily report in the prescribed formats – Plan
vs Accomplished with the CMO and concerned MOIC at the block level. Based on the deliverable report, Rs
10000/- per month will be paid as the remuneration (monthly) for three months from the CMO office.
S/he will fill in the following reports a) Block MDA preparedness checklist report, b)Training report
c0Concurrent and consequent monitoring reports as per formats and d)Daily update on the MDA progress.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

4. Block Social Mobilisation Coordinator: To facilitate communication at the block level, Block Social
Mobilisation Coordinator will be deployed at the block level for three months for the MDA. For effective
support, it is advised to deploy the block social mobilization coordinator two months before Mass Drug
Administration. This position will work under the leadership of CMO/CS/DMHO/DVBDCO.
Key roles and responsibilities
PRE MDA (70 days)
-
Lead the social mobilization activities at the block level.
-
Develop a block mobilization plan- Participate in the Block Coordination Committee meeting.
-
Attend District Training of Trainers.
-
Coordinate with the block level offices for MDA mobilization.
-
Attend monthly meetings in the education and panchayat department to plan out MDA mobilization.
-
Develop the training plan for the drug administrators (DA) and the supervisors and conduct training of
the DAs and supervisors on IPC and social mobilization and undertake monitoring visits in the block.
-
Sensitise the school children and teachers on MDA campaign and monitor and conduct school level
competition (Essay/drawing, etc)
-
Collaborate and Engage/support the ASHA supervisors to complete the micro plans and with the health
sub-centers for IEC materials- distribution and display.
-
Update the mobilization status to the concern point person (education, SRLM, ICDS, BDO) and the MDA
Preparedness to the CMO every week.
DURING MDA (10 days)
-
Review concurrent monitoring findings for the blocks and provide support to the blocks who are showing
low coverage; Attend the block level evening debriefing and share the findings of concurrent monitoring
data.
POST MDA (10 days): Support the Post MDA Assessment survey.
Experience and skill set: Graduate in social sciences/sociology/ mass media/arts/sciences with experience
of community mobilization (group formation, school interventions, ASHA training, volunteer program) at
the block/district level. S/he should be able to coordinate with the Government block and district officials.
Any person who has worked with programs like Social Mobilization Network, pulse polio, SRLM, External
Monitors, NGO run projects will be given priority. Students who have volunteered as NSS and NCC candidates
during the previous MDAs will also be considered as potential candidates. The identified Block Mobilization
Coordinator will be trained at the district level by the LF partners (WHO/PCI) in consultation with the CMO/
DVBDO.
Report and Remuneration: The BSMC should share daily report in the prescribed formats – Plan vs
Accomplished with the CMO. Based on the deliverable report, Rs 12000/- per month will be paid as the
remuneration (monthly) for three months from the CMO office.S/he will fill in the following reports a)Block
mobilization plan, b)Field Monitoring checklist and c)Monthly reporting format.
5. Supervisor at Village level: The Supervisors at village level will ensure daily reporting and overall
completion of activity by Drug Administrators. They will facilitate training, drug provision, and resolve
logistic issue at the field. One supervisor will be allocated over 5 - 10 teams. S/he will also ensure
accountability of Drug Administrators and ensure that details team micro plans are prepared, reviewed,
and submitted to block officer before each MDA round. For the states, that did not propose the supervisor
honorarium in the PIPs can include for the 10 high risk and priority blocks of the district.
6. Social Mobilisation Coordinator at Panchayat level: To ensure coordination at the block level with a
focus on engaging the panchayat leaders, one human resource will be deployed at the block level for fortyfive days. For effective support, it is advised to deploy the social mobilization coordinator forty days before
Mass Drug Administration. This position will work under the leadership of the CMO/DVBDCO.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Key roles and responsibilities
PRE MDA
-
Lead the social mobilization activities at the panchayat level.
-
Participate in the Block Coordination Committee meeting.
-
Develop a panchayat wise mobilization plan for the block.
-
Organize a planning meeting with the panchayat leaders- Mukhiya/Pradhan/ward members/ Sachiv’s
under the chairmanship of Block Development Officer and coordinate with the Panchayat leaders-
Mukhiya/Pradhan/ward members/Sachiv to organize mobilization activities.
-
Leverage existing collectives like milk cooperatives/Kisan clubs/Kishori clubs etc. for MDA mobilization.
-
Collaborate with the health sub-centres and engage the ASHA in developing the micro plans and with the
health sub-centres for IEC materials- distribution and display.
-
Update the MDA Preparedness to the BDO/MOIC/DVBDO/CMO every week and undertake monitoring
visit in the block.
DURING MDA: Ensure all the pradhans inaugurate the MDA and consume drugs in a community meeting;
Undertake joint observation visits along with the Panchayat leaders- Mukhiya/Pradhan/ward members/Sachiv
and take action to strengthen MDA; Mobilize the Panchayat leaders- Mukhiya/Pradhan/ward members/Sachiv
to review the coverage and compliance with the ASHA supervisors.
Experience and skill set: A person who has experience of community mobilization (group formation, school
intervention, Asha training, volunteer program) at the panchayat and block level. S/he should be able to
coordinate with the panchayat leaders and motivate them for MDA mobilization. Any person who has worked
with programs like Social Mobilization Network, State Rural Livelihood Mission, External Monitors, NGO
run programs will be given priority. Students who have volunteered as NSS and NCC candidates during the
previous MDAs will also be considered as potential candidates.
Report and Remuneration: The SMC at Panchayat level should share daily reports and fortnightly deliverable
report in the prescribed formats – Plan vs Accomplished with the MOIC/CMO. Based on the deliverable
report, Rs 800/- per day will be paid as the remuneration.
To ensure extensive reach, awareness generation and prepare communities for consuming anti filarial
drugs. Mission Steering Group has approved additional support for social mobilization activities.
This additional support will be deployed at district, block, and panchayat levels for the purpose of
social mobilisation activities.
At district level:
-
District Social Mobilisation Coordinator: At a rate of Rs 1000 per day for three months
At block level (for ten high risk and priority blocks/IUs of the district only)
-
Block Social Mobilisation Coordinator: One per block @ Rs 12000 per month for 3 months.
At Panchayat and Village level (for ten high risk and priority blocks/IUs of the district only)
-
Supervisor at Village level: Honorarium for supervisors involved in MDA @ Rs.600/- for days of
MDA.
-
Social Mobilisation Coordinator at Panchayat level: One per block @ Rs 800 per day for 45 days
(Note: The criteria for the selection of 10 blocks/IUs in a district: High risk and high priority blocks/IUs including urban areas in a
district should include: 1) High Mf rate, 2) poor compliance to MDA in last two rounds 3) hard to reach area 4) high level of refusals
for MDA drugs.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Chapter-9
MONITORING AND EVALUATION OF
LYMPHATIC FILARIASIS PROGRAMME
-
Monitoring is guided by the principle of supporting the programme and making it more efficient in
terms of preparation, implementation and improving outcome.
-
Microfilaria Survey measures the impact of MDA to have the first level indication of reduction in Mf
prevalence in the community across two surveillance sites.
-
Additional Mf survey is to validate the status of Mf rate, each block will identify and conduct mf
survey across 3 additional random sites.
-
Periodically share the programatic information and deliverables to track the progress and facilitate
the decision-making process.
-
Transmission Assessment Survey is a tool designed to know whether transmission is interrupted by
MDA and therefore this is the true evaluation of MDA.
9.1 Introduction - Monitoring of MDA round
Monitoring & Evaluation of the ELF programme is an inbuilt component to help monitor the process indicators
as well as assess the impact of the programme that helps to make evidence-based programmatic decisions to
strengthen the programme implementation. It also addresses the gaps with corrective measures, captures the
information on MMDP service for people with lymphedema and hydrocele. It also helps to take decisions on
the interruption of transmission in selected geography.
The programme needs to be monitored continuously throughout the cycle of implementation from planning
to the post MDA phase which comprises of three phases.
-
Pre-MDA monitoring or preparedness assessment.
-
During MDA round or concurrent monitoring.
-
Post MDA assessment or evaluation.
9.1.1 Pre-MDA monitoring or preparedness monitoring
With the fixed day MDAs i.e. 10th Feb and 10th Aug every year, it gives an opportunity to the programme for
advance planning. The state should start the advance planning 4-6 months prior to MDA dates as per the
LF pre-MDA planning tracker provided by NCBVDC. The LF pre-MDA planning tracker is a useful tool to
be used by the states, districts, and blocks to plan and track various components such as governance, supply
chain, training, SBC etc for effective implementation of MDA. The purpose of the tracker is to create national/
state/district level views and generate alerts on the preparedness of states for MDA rounds. This tool helps
in planning, tracking important activities to be completed before MDA and to take necessary measures to
address the gaps.
The state and district/block enter in actual dates of completion of each activity and sub activities against the
envisaged dates as per programme norms. This will provide information regarding the extent of adherence
to envisaged timeline and delays in three color coded sub-categories- ‘Within acceptable limit’ (Green),
‘Moderately delayed’(Yellow) and ‘Highly delayed’ (Red).

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

The teams and individuals visiting the field for reviewing and assessing the preparedness activities at the block,
district and state level, should use format for monitoring of preparedness at Planning unit (Block/Urban)
on Mass Drug Administration as per Annexure 7. Based on the assessment, mid-course corrections need to
be initiated at all the levels. A prior, systematic, and well- planned preparedness exercise ensures that enough
time is available to identify and address those gaps before conducting MDA round.
9.1.2 Supervision of MDA
A detailed supervision plan should be made before the start of MDA in any given village/ward. Supervision
plan must be finalized and submitted along with the detailed micro plan. Details of allocation of Supervisor to
the DAs must be completed and included in the micro plan. Sector supervisor and the nodal persons should
also be identified well before the MDA and all sector supervisors and nodal persons must be briefed about
their role and responsibilities. Sector supervisors must finalize their supervision plan in consultation with the
supervisors and a copy of the supervision plan must be submitted to the block PHC along with the micro plan
before starting MDA.
The Supervisor for MDA could be ASHA facilitator, ANM, MPW, Health Assistant Male & Female. In addition,
the supervision or monitoring plans need to be prepared at Block level, Urban areas, district and State level
with details of constitution of teams and travel plans and monitor the activities as per the templates mentioned
in Annexure 3 and 8.
9.1.3 During MDA round
Daily supervision by DA Supervisor
The Drug Administrator Supervisor (DA Supervisor) undertakes the first level of supervision. The DA
supervisors are a part of the government health system at the peripheral level and are assigned with the
responsibility of supervising the DA team. All supervisors are to be trained additionally in expected roles
and responsibilities at their respective block/ district level. The supervisor will ensure trained DAs, drugs and
logistics and ensure no area is missed, especially team areas in peri urban/urban areas, if any areas are found
missed should be included by them in the micorplans. The supervisor based on the field observations should
provide feedback and extend on-the-job training to address the shortcomings, conversion of refusals in the
community and mitigate other operational challenges. The supervisor will discuss with the team about reasons
for refusal and provide guidance on planning revisits and engaging the local PRI members, influentials in the
community for converting them to accept the consumption of MDA drugs in presence of DA.
The supervisor is expected to cross-check 3-4 houses that include a back check of previous houses covered for
MDA. The supervisor should also compile coverage data of the assigned teams and provide feedback to all DA
teams as well as to share the summary report with his/ her respective MOIC/ BMO/ MO/VBD consultant for
corrective actions to ensure a quality MDA round in the block during daily evening briefing.
The district/block officials, NGO partners will support in training of DA Supervisor, recording and analysis of
the data and in providing the required technical or administrative support for the monitoring of the DA teams.
Daily coverage reports
For monitoring purposes, each IU is expected to collect and share day-wise coverage reports for each block
from all the supervisors. These reports will be consolidated at the block/district level and then shared with the
state and NCVBDC. The coverage against both the total population as well as against the eligible population

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

should be recorded and reported. States have developed their digital reporting apps for MDA coverage such
as CS pro in Uttar Pradesh and Su-kruti app in Bihar, however at the National level the block wise coverage of
MDA is to be uploaded on IHIP.
9.1.4 Concurrent Monitoring
The concurrent monitoring is implemented at the time of MDA to assess its progress in terms of whether the
process of implementation is in line with the guidelines and whether MDA drugs are reaching the targeted
communities. This helps in providing information on two aspects- one regarding availability and working of
all recruited DA teams as per micro plan. Secondly to assess the coverage levels across IUs conducting MDA.
Thus, it provides insights into the programme and to concerned officers to make necessary course corrections
and in providing feedback to DA teams/supervisors and decision-makers with actionable insights.
For this purpose, monitoring teams need to be constituted at
-
District level with Civil Surgeon, DVBDCO, VBD consultant, District Programme Manager, City
Programme Managers, Chief Development Officer, Municipal Health Officer, Malaria Inspectors, etc to
monitor the block level activities.
-
At block-level the monitoring teams of government officials comprise of MO/ MoIC, BDO, Malaria
Inspectors, Supervisors.
-
At State level, state entomologists, State consultants, SRD/RD officers and consultants from ROHFW etc.

At all levels a monitoring plan needs to be prepared and they need to visit the field prior and during the MDA
rounds. These monitors use the checklist in the field and observe the MDA implementation and the work of
DAs and supervisors and share the observed gaps and suggest actions in their reporting to the district/ state.
In addition, the NGO partners also undertake concurrent monitoring using the common formats. The officers
/consultants from the national level also undertake monitoring visits to support the government in assessing
the ongoing work and take corrective actions.
The checklist for the concurrent Monitoring of the MDA at State/District/ /Block/Urban//village/ward
level (Annexure 8).
9.1.5 Reviews and Reporting
Evening Briefing Meetings: Daily evening briefing meetings at various levels are very important for sharing
the monitoring findings by Govt officers/partners and ensuring midcourse corrective actions. These meetings
should be organized at PHC/UHCs/block level, District & State level chaired by MOI/C, CMO/DHO/Civil
Surgeon/CDMPHO etc. & State Programme officer respectively. Minutes/proceedings of the meeting should
be circulated to concerned officers the next day. The post MDA review meeting should also ensure that
community registers and logbooks are well- organized and stored for the next year.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Reports/Reviews
By whom
Review on
MDA implementation and
coverage review at Block level
(daily during MDA period)
PHC/UPHC/Urban health
facility Supervisor/sector
supervisor/medical officer
concerned
Review the daily performance of DAs, coverage
of households, DOTS, refusal households and
revisits with outcome, reporting quality, Identify
the less drug administration coverage locations,
drug usage, stock available, storage
Post MDA review (within a
period of 10 days after MDA)
Subcentre/PHC/Ward/
Municipal staff
Identify the less drug administration coverage
locations, mopping plan, drug usage, stock
available, storage Lessons learnt and challenges
Consolidation and Submission
of Reports (within a period of
20 days after MDA)
PHC/Municipality to District
Headquarters along with
Review Remarks
As per the reporting tables format
Submission of Final Report to
the State Programme Officer/
NCVBDC (to be submitted
within 30 days after MDA)
District head quarters
State Office
Review and consolidation of formats;
Submission of concurrent monitoring reports;
Post MDA assessment/survey report by medical
colleges/WHO/ICMR institutes
Table 4.11: Reporting and Reviews
9.1.6 Coverage Evaluation Survey
Coverage Evaluation Survey is conducted to find out the actual drug consumption and reasons for noncompliance through checking of such vital questions from a sample of HHs across the district/ block. This
survey is led and managed by medical colleges/ WHO. The next chapter explains this post-MDA assessment in
detail. The medical college faculty members engaged in the CES need to be oriented and a training and action
plan needs to be prepared. The state and districts need to ensure timely release of the funds to the medical
colleges, so that they can conduct the CES immediately after the completion of the mop rounds. The details
are provided in chapter 10.
9.2. Reporting formats and tables for LF programme data
The programme has revised the existing LF reporting formats considering the revised programmatic needs
and strategies such as block-level IUs/ EUs for MDA, Morbidity Management and Disability Prevention, Early
case detection and treatment. Many of these formats are being incorporated in IHIP portal.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Annexure
No
Name of the format
Remarks
9.1
Table 1: Update on
the distribution of
Lymphatic Filariasis
Categorization of the various blocks of the districts into endemic or nonendemic based on the mapping data along with population figures of the
blocks
9.2 (2A and
2B)
Table 2 (A&B) Data
on Mf survey and pre
TAS
2A: This captures the information on Mf surveys across two sites at the block,
persons examined and Mf % and 2B: Block level Pre TAS for DA/IDA Survey
and needs to update on LF IHIP portal.
9.3
Table 3: Mass Drug
Administration
(MDA) Coverage
Administrative coverage (DOC) as summarized from the family registers by
the DAs. It also captures disaggregated data by age group and gender at IU
level. Needs to update on LF IHIP portal.
9.4
Table 4: HR details for
the LF
An annual table, that provides data of all staff at various levels, sanctioned,
or deputed to work for the LF programme and number trained for MMDP
services.
9.5
Table 5: Health
infrastructure
available for MMDP
Captures data annually on health facilities at district and block level with
number of facilities providing MMDP services.
9.6
Table 6: Training of
Health Staff for ELF
Captures data on trainings for staff directly involved in the MDA drugs
administration such as DAs, DA supervisors, medical officers (MOs) and
RRTs.
9.7
Table 7: IEC/SBC
Campaign for MDA
Captures the data on IEC and SBC activities. Details on the number of various
IEC materials required, received, and distributed.
9.8
Table 8: Post
Consumption events
or Adverse Events
The data pertaining to adverse events from drugs during MDA campaign
along with details. Update the data during MDA on LF IHIP portal.
9.9
Table 9: Stock status of
drugs
Reviewing the stock status for all drugs in the MDA round with opening
balance, quantity received during the present round, and the quantity used.
Additionally, with expiry details
9.10
Table 10: Line listing
of Filaria Patients
The table provides data on each Lymphoedema and hydrocele patient and
needs to periodically update on LFIHIP portal.
9.11
Table 11: Monthly
MMDP report
This is a monthly report to be submitted by each district for all blocks. The
table captures new cases reported, cumulative total of Lymphoedema and
hydrocele, records grading for lymphoedema, no trained on MMDP, kits given
for MMDP, No ADL / acute attacks and no. treated , no of hydrocele surgeries
conducted and backlog of surgeries with follow up details
9.12
Table 12: Details of
the DCC and SBC
meetings
Data regarding all the block level and district level meetings that are organized
as part of the planning and review processes with respect to the current round
of MDA in each block/ district undergoing MDA.
The reporting formats are attached in the Annexure 9 (9.1 to 9.12) and are being briefly explained below in
the table:
9.3 Activities and Surveillance after stopping MDA (Post MDA Surveillance)
A successful Transmission Assessment Survey (TAS) in a particular Evaluation Unit (EU) leads to the stoppage
of MDA. But this does not mean Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis (ELF) has been achieved in the EU. Even
after MDA has stopped, the LF elimination programme will continue for a further period. National strategy
for post MDA surveillance includes activities like:
-
Entomological data collection
-
Mf survey and periodic screening of migratory population
-
Intensification of morbidity management
-
Vector control.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Programmes should aim to integrate post-MDA surveillance activities with the existing population-based
surveys to minimize the need for long-term resources for LF specific surveillance. Vector control can also be
beneficial in lymphatic filariasis programmes in areas where local transmission has been interrupted. The risk
for recurrence of LF after mass drug administration has stopped is unknown, but vector control could be a
useful strategy to maintain a transmission-free status and reduce the risk for re-introduction.
The states and district officials to leverage the existing entomological surveillance units for VBDs. The
entomological surveillance activities need to conduct throughout the year. In addition, coordinate with
malaria programme and ensure bed net distribution in co-endemic areas.
Activities for Intensification of morbidity management and disability prevention.
To manage the disabilities due to Lymphatic filariasis and to prevent progression to more advanced stages,
people with lymphoedema/elephantiasis must have access to continued care throughout their lives in all the
endemic districts. MMDP service must be continued in endemic communities after mass drug administration
has stopped and after surveillance and verification of interruption of transmission, as chronically affected
patients are likely to remain in these communities.
In post-MDA surveillance, the updating of the line lists must be continued by ANM & Health Worker for both
rural and urban areas during their routine field visits.
9.4 Post MDA Surveillance
After the stoppage of MDA, surveillance should be implemented in the following ways:
a. Periodic surveys
Along with the post MDA surveillance activities which are conducted continuously, a series of two post- MDA
surveillance surveys (TAS-2 & TAS-3) should be conducted to evaluate whether recrudescence has occurred.
Each survey should be conducted after 2 years following the previous survey and should use a similar design
to the original TAS.
b. Ongoing Surveillance activities
Ongoing Surveillance includes Annual Entomological Surveillance and Annual Mf survey. Microfilaria (Mf)
survey will be periodically conducted in the Evaluation Unit (EU) to indicate absence, presence, or recrudescence
of recent LF infection. For each EU, 4 surveillance sites will be selected; 1 Sentinel & 1 Random site each from
Urban & Rural area. Random sites will be selected each year. Like Entomological data collection, Mf survey
will be done in the same selected surveillance site(s) during October-November each year. A minimum of 50
blood slides are to be collected from each surveillance site in a population/persons above 20 years.
Non-residents (living continuously for less than one year) are to be excluded from the Mf survey. If post-MDA
survey results exceed the critical threshold, consult NCVBDC for next steps, potentially requiring more local/
focal MDA rounds a criteria. For entomological surveillance, please refer to Chapter No.11.
During post-MDA period, “testing and treating” for high-risk populations needs to be carried out and all
positive cases need to be treated with Directly Observed Single dose of DA or IDA as per the MDA schedule
followed by standard treatment with DEC of dosage 6mg/Kg body weight daily for 12 days to be consumed
after the meal. If such cases can be followed up easily, repeat testing and treatment if positive could be done.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

c. Screening of migratory population
In some EUs, the problem of population migration is common. Such migration, particularly from other LF
endemic areas, can initiate a fresh spurt of transmission of LF infection in the EUs where post-MDA surveillance
is going on. The health authorities of such EUs should take up the issue with administrative authorities.
Provision for screening of migrating population should be done at the time of entry to the Blocks or within
one month of entry into blocks. The night blood survey of migratory population should be conducted among
the age group of 20 years and above. Support from other allied departments/ministries should be sought for
effective screening of such populations.
9.5 Documenting the Best Practices and Lessons Learnt
It is important to share the best practice to identify and share the best way of doing it and then share with
others. The practices related to the planning, implementation or strategy adopted while implementing the
programme should be documented at all levels. It is important to know and assess what is working well or not
in the different contexts, the source for best practice related information may be from the frontline workers,
IU staff, district administration, civil societies, allied departments, partner organizations, community groups
and individuals.
9.6 Monitoring indicators for LF programme
Indicator
Unit
Unit reporting
Conduct annual Mass Drug Administration (MDA) in eligible
districts/blocks/IUs
Number
DA /IDA blocks or IUs &
districts -
The proportion of districts/IUs achieving >90 % against the eligible
population.
Percentage
DA/IDA blocks or IUs
&districts --
State Task Force / Coordination meetings under MD NHM for
MDA.
District Task Force/Coordination meetings under District Collector/
Magistrate for MDA
Number
State:
District
% of PHCs in the endemic districts providing MMDP care (Total no
of PHCs providing MMDP care/Total number of PHCs)
Percentage
% of PHCs providing
MMDP care
% of total lymphoedema cases provided with MMDP kits (MMDP
kits distributed/ Total lymphoedema cases)
Percentage
% Lymphoedema cases
provided with MMDP
kits -
% of hydrocele surgeries conducted (Hydrocelectomy done/Total
hydrocele cases)
Percentage
% Hydrocelectomies
Cumulative number of endemic districts which achieved mf rate
<1% verified by TAS1 (%)
Nos. (%)
Cumulative number of districts to achieve Disease Free Status- LF as
per TAS 3 Clearance (%)
Nos. (%)

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Chapter-10
COVERAGE EVALUATION SURVEY
-
MDA assessment to be conducted using Coverage Evaluation Surveys (CES) at the block level.
-
From each block select, 4 sub centers/municipal area and 4 villages/urban areas using random
sampling.
-
Each block needs to conduct interview of 30 households in 4 selected areas i.e 120 households (4*30)
-
The assessment should be completed preferable within 6 weeks after MDA so that the community will
be able to recall the events without memory lapse.
10.1 Introduction
Assessment and analysis of MDA implementation will be helpful to identify coverage compliance and the
reasons thereof for noncompliance. This will enable the programme to overcome shortcomings and improve
the MDA implementation next year. Mostly, the MDA programmes depend upon the surveyed treatment
coverage rates assessed through treatment coverage evaluation surveys (WHO, 2011) in representative blocks
to judge the strength of the programme implementation. This is often supplemented with a collection of data
on people’s awareness of the programme, during the coverage surveys. WHO also conducts concurrent and
consequent monitoring evaluations, and the data can also be used to review the activity. While the standard
methodology is available to conduct coverage evaluation surveys, questionnaires need to be prepared to collect
qualitative data. The coverage evaluation survey details and qualitative data questionnaires are presented here.
10.2 Coverage Evaluation Survey
Achieving and sustaining good treatment coverage in MDA rounds is crucial to the success of LF elimination
programmes. Low coverage may necessitate additional MDAs or if unnoticed, may lead to premature impact
evaluations. Drug coverage is defined as the proportion of individuals who have ingested a drug or combination
of drugs.
Surveyed Treatment Coverage (Compliance rate) is calculated by dividing the total number of individuals
reporting to have taken the drug(s)/consumed in front of the Drug Administrators by the total number of
eligible populations during the MDA. Although the main purpose of coverage surveys is to validate reported
drug coverage, these surveys also provide an opportunity to collect information and data on other areas of
interest, such as MDA delivery, sex, and age-specific coverage, drug adverse events, reasons for non-compliance
and health education strategies (Worrell C and Mathieu, 2012).
Ideally, coverage evaluation surveys should be carried out as early as possible to ensure good recall among
community members participating in the MDA programme. Hence, the treatment coverage evaluation surveys
should be carried out within one month of concluding the MDA programme implementation. The objectives
of the coverage evaluation survey under NPELF are as follows:
1. To independently get coverage and compliance and to find out the reasons for non-compliance among the
households surveyed.
2. To recommend corrective measures to enhance the DOC coverage in future rounds of MDA.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Coverage evaluated coverage data will be used to take decisions for stopping the MDA, and the coverage
evaluation surveys will be carried out in the maximum number of MDA Implementing Units. Efforts should
be made to complete the survey with a budgetary allocation of Rs. 35,000 per district which is provisioned
under the state PIPs. This may be accomplished by enlisting the support of medical colleges and research
institutions.
10.3 Methodology and Process
Coverage surveys are conducted in the MDA implementation unit (IU) level, commonly a block/s of a district.
Because surveys are not meant to provide an annual assessment of drug coverage in each IU, only a proportion
of representative IUs are included in the coverage evaluation survey. Coverage evaluation surveys are meant to
assist program managers in confirming if the reported treatment coverage is unbiased and if the programme
needs improvement.
10.3.1 Steps in selection process
Step 1 (Selection of blocks/Implementing Unit): In a district, a total of five implementing Units (can be a
Block/CHC/PHC/UPHC or Municipality/Mandal based on the list submitted by the state to NCVBDC for
MDA) are to be selected purposively based on the reported coverage or DOT Coverage data (Compliance) in
consultation with the concerned state/district officials. Selection of Implementing Unit can also be done based
on the WHO monitoring data (wherever available) that reported high distribution percentage.
In each district, five Implementing Units are to be selected, out of which one should be urban. If there are more
urban blocks in a district, the selection of the implementing units needs to be according to the proportion of
the urban to the rural population. If the district has less than 5 Implementing Units/blocks, then all the IUs/
blocks need to be selected for Coverage Evaluation Survey.
Step 2 (Selection of Sub centers/urban area): In the selected implementing Unit, three sub-centers are to be
selected from the rural area and one ward from an urban area. This needs to be selected randomly from the
overall list. In case, if the implementing Unit is an urban area, then select four wards randomly from the list
of all the urban wards.
Step 3 (Selection of Villages/Ward): Out of the four sub-centers selected randomly, select randomly three
villages and one urban ward from the list of villages/wards. (One Village from each sub-center/Ward). But, if
it is an Urban IU, select all 4 urban areas/Mohalla from the list of all urban wards.
Step 4 (Selection of Households): In each implementing unit, 120 households (4*30 HHs) need to be selected
and interviewed for the coverage evaluation survey. 30 households from each village or ward.
Calculating the sample interval: Once the villages/wards or urban areas are selected, Systematic random
sampling needs to be used for the selection of 30 households in each village/urban area.
For a desired sample size of the households, assign a regular interval number (Dividing the total households
of that selected village/urban with 30 households) to arrive at the sampling interval for the selection of
households in the respective village for conducting interviews. Based on the sampling interval 30 households
were to be interviewed. For example, if the village/urban area is having 275 households, then divide the total
households with a desired sample size of 30, your fixed interval would be 9 and so every 9th household needs
to be interviewed i.e. 9th, 18th, 27th ,36th,45th, 54th .......... And so on.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

The following table provides a summary of steps to be followed for conducting coverage evaluation survey.
10.3.2 Conducting Interviews of the selected households
Interview all family members in the selected house & note findings in the attached format. For example,
in a household, if there are 5 members, all 5 members should be enumerated, and the data collected for
all five individuals. Even if some household members are not present at the time of the survey, their drug
consumption details should be collected from the person interviewed by the survey team. If the selected house
is locked or no one is available to share information, visit the immediate next house and conduct the interview
and complete 30 houses in each village.


o











Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Interview of individuals: In each selected household, the interviewer should extend greetings and introduce
himself/herself to the head of the household. He should explain the purpose of the survey clearly and in simple
language. Using the survey form, fill in all the names of the household members in the survey form and solicit
information on treatment details and fill in the information for each individual.
The master sheet of data collection format needs to be submitted along with the report as an annexure.
10.2 Format for data collection – DA/ IDA districts and the data collected
sheet needs to be shared along with the report.

10.3.3 Survey Team and field work:
The survey teams should arrange all the logistics necessary to implement the survey and start the fieldwork.
As indicated earlier, ideally, the survey should be carried out within one month after concluding the MDA
programme (mop up) in the district.
To ensure an independent coverage evaluation survey, the team members/interviewers should be selected
from among medical colleges or research institutes. For each implementing Unit/ block, one team is assigned
with 2 members for conducting interviews and one supervisor and accordingly the teams can be formulated.
The team members should be able to communicate in the local language with reasonable interviewing skills.
Each team will cover 1 village/urban area (30 houses) in a day, So, a survey will be completed in 4 days for that
block by each team.
Training: All interviewers and supervisors should be trained by the district programme officer/ partner agency
coordinators if available in the State. Topics addressed during the training include the purpose of the survey,
sampling methodology and questionnaire administration. The duration of the training should be at least one
day with some practical field exercises and role plays. This is to ensure that all interviewers understood the
survey methodology and the questionnaire is administered in a standard fashion.
Data analysis: Once the data is collected from each block/IU, it is important to organize the data in a way that
makes it easy to work with. This involves cleaning the data to remove any errors or inconsistencies, converting
data into a common format, and/or structuring data into a table or excel spreadsheet. The organized data and
analysis need to focus on the objectives of the coverage evaluation survey and align with the relevant collected
information and choose appropriate analysis methods and conduct the analysis by identifying patterns,
relationships, and trends in the data, and drawing conclusions about what the data reveals. The suggestive
indicators are:

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

% People received drugs
-
% People consumed drugs
-
% People have not received even single dose till date (Never treated)
-
Reasons for not consuming drugs
-
% Family members with side effect after consuming drug
-
Awareness about MDA and LF
10.4 Suggestive Reporting Template
The outline for CES reporting is suggested below:
-
Introduction (LF endemicity of the state, district, and blocks and LF programme)
-
Objectives of CES
-
Methodology
-
Results
-
Summary and Recommendations

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Chapter-11
VECTORS OF LYMPHATIC FILARIASIS AND
THEIR MANAGEMENT
11.1. Introduction
In India, Lymphatic filariasis (LF) is caused by two parasitic species of parasitic worms: Wuchereria bancrofti
(W. bancrofti) and Brugia malayi (B. malayi). These worms have generally similar life cycles, refer Chapter
1.2 for epidemiology. W. bancrofti is the most predominant infection, accounting for 99.4% of cases in the
country which is primarily transmitted by Culex (Cx.) quinquefasciatus, except in Andaman and Nicobar
Islands, where it is transmitted by Aedes (Downsiomyia) niveus. B. malayi is transmitted by both Mansonia
(Mn.) annulifera and Mn. uniformis.
Vector management is perceived as an important strategy for LF elimination. It was an integral part of erstwhile
National Filaria Control Programme. The primary objectives of vector management are to reduce the density
and survival of infected mosquitoes, interrupt disease transmission and ultimately prevent new infections in
humans. This chapter aims to provide an overview of vectors and key components of their management for
elimination of LF and preventing further transmission. It highlights vector bionomics, surveillance and vector
control approaches.
11.2. Vector morphology & bionomics
Vector morphology and bionomics encompass study of the physical characteristics, behavior, and breeding
ecology of the mosquitoes responsible for transmitting LF. Understanding the morphological characteristics
of LF vectors is essential for accurate identification and differentiation from other mosquito species. These
distinguishing features aid in targeted vector surveillance and control measures for effective LF management.
Understanding of bionomics is important for planning effective vector control strategies and interventions.
11.2.1. Culex quinquefasciatus
11.2.1.1 Morphology of Culex quinquefasciatus
Cx. quinquefasciatus is the most common mosquito and is about 3.96 to 4.25 mm long. Female mosquitoes
normally fly for about a kilometre from breeding place and remain close to breeding habitats and host sources.
Males are weak fliers and are found near the breeding sources. This species is associated with human beings,
rest inside houses and highly anthropophagic. It bites indoor, biting activity starts after sunset and bite
throughout night with peak in the mid night. After blood meal they rest in cooler places indoor. Average life
of female mosquito is about a month with males having the short life span, usually less than 10 days. The life
cycle of Culex mosquito from egg to adult stage takes about a week to complete in conducive environmental
conditions.
11.2.1.2 Life cycle
Egg: Cx. quinquefasciatus mosquitoes lay their eggs on the water surface. One brood comprises about 150-300
eggs, which are tightly bound together in a boat-shaped structure, called as raft. The female Culex mosquito
lays eggs approximately every third night throughout its adult stage. After 24-48 hours, the eggs hatch and
free-swimming larvae emerge.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Figure 11.1: Culex quinquefasciatus egg raft
Larva: The larvae have a short and stout head, an abdomen having eight segments, a siphon, and a saddle
(Figure11.2). The siphon is located on the dorsal side of the abdomen and is four times longer than it is wide.
The siphon has more than one pairs of sub-ventral tufts of hairs and it is used for breathing air from the water
surface. The larvae hang upside-down with an angle from the water surface. The larvae are very active and are
often called “wigglers”. They feed on a variety of microorganisms, including microalgae, in water. The larvae
pass through four stages of development known as instars (I, II, III & IV). The larval stage is completed in
approximately seven days. Towards the end of the fourth instar, the larvae stop eating and molt into pupae.
A
B
Figure: 11.2 (A) Culex larva hanging position and structure of siphon
Pupa: The IVth instar larva undergoes metamorphosis to transform into a pupa. The pupa is comma-shaped
and has a breathing tube. The pupa is a non-feeding stage and is usually inactive.
Adult: Adult mosquitoes medium-sized and are terrestrial. After emerging, they rest on the surface to allow
its body and wings to dry and harden before the mosquito takes its first flight. Females primarily feed on
human blood for egg development, while males feed on plant sap or nectar. Cx. quinquefasciatus bites at nighttime and is mostly indoor feeder. It is highly anthropophilic but also feeds on cattle (zoophilic). It rests both
outdoor and indoor (exophilic and endophilic). The thorax, legs and wing veins are covered with pale colored
scales. The abdomen is predominantly covered with brown or blackish scales across most segments. The tip
of the abdomen is rounded in female and pointed in male. In females, the palps are significantly shorter than
the proboscis, whereas in males, the palpi are approximately equal or greater than proboscis. The adults can
fly upto 3 km.
Figure: 11.3 (A) Adult Culex quinquefasciatus, (B) Difference between Male and Female

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

11.2.1.3 Breeding Ecology
These mosquitoes commonly breed in various polluted water sources including blocked drains, septic tanks,
open sewers, cess pits, cess pools, cemented tanks, barrels, puddles, ditches, marshy areas, abandoned pots, pit
well, unused wells, stagnated polluted water and rainwater collections.

(B)
(C)
(D)
Figure 11.4: Breeding places of Culex quinquefasciatus: (A) Blocked drain,(B) Cement pit with polluted water,(C) Septic
tank drainage (D) Open polluted water
11.2.2 Mansonia
It is a genus of mosquitoes, breed in ponds and lakes containing certain aquatic plants, especially the floating
plants like Pistia stratiotes, water hyacinth etc.
11.2.2.1 Morphology
Mansonia mosquitoes are large to medium-sized black or brown mosquitoes with sparkling on their wings and
legs. Their wing scales are broad and asymmetrical, mixed dark and pale. The body is covered with in broad,
dark brown and yellowish scales, which gives a beautiful appearance compare to other mosquito species.
11.2.2.2 Life cycle
Egg: Mansonia mosquitoes lay their eggs in clusters attaching them to the undersides of aquatic plant leaves.
Eggs are elongated and laid in typical star-shaped raft which makes it easy to distinguish from eggs of other
mosquitoes. Normally the eggs hatch within 48 hours.

Figure-11.4: Mn. annulifera

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Larva: After hatching, the larvae emerge from the eggs and live in the water. Mansonia larvae have a distinctive
appearance with a long, narrow body and a breathing tube (siphon) at the posterior end, which they use to
obtain air from air pockets of aquatic plant roots. Immatures use their modified siphons and trumpets to
pierce the roots and stems of aquatic vegetation for respiration. They feed on microorganisms and organic
matter present in the water.
Pupa: Like other mosquitoes, the larva undergoes metamorphosis to transform into a pupa. The pupa is
comma-shaped and also has a breathing tube, which it uses to breathe while hanging at the water surface. Pupa
does not feed and remains relatively inactive.
Adult: Once development is complete, the adult mosquito emerges from the pupal case onto the water surface.
After resting briefly to allow its body and wings to dry and harden, the mosquito takes its first flight. Male
mosquitoes typically feed on nectar and other plant juices, while females require a blood meal to develop eggs.
Adults are strong fliers, with a flight range of 1.5-3.5 km. Female Mn. uniformis preferentially feeds outdoors
on cattle with peak biting between 19:00–20:00, but the species frequently bites man and a wide variety of
other primates.

Figure-11.5: Life cycle of Mansonia mosquito
11.2.3 Aedes (Downsiomyia) niveus
Aedes (Ae.) niveus is a day biting mosquito. Though primarily zoophilic, it bites humans as well. It is a vector
of sub-periodic W. bancrofti in the Andaman & Nicobar Islands.
11.2.3.1 Morphology
Adult Ae. (Downsiomyia) niveus mosquitoes are with black and white stripes on abdomen. The mesothorax
covered with silvery scales which makes it different from other Aedes mosquitoes. Femur part of hindlegs of
this mosquito are white in colour which is a distinguishing feature.
Figure-11.6 A. Adult Aedes (Downsiomyia) niveus, B. Enlarged mesothorax with silvery scales

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

11.3 Vector Surveillance
Vector surveillance is vital for monitoring the transmission potential of LF in a locality. This involves regular
and systematic collection of data on mosquito distribution, seasonal prevalence, bionomics and infection rates.
This information is critical for planning, implementing, monitoring, and evaluating the effectiveness of various
vector control interventions. This data should be analysed and interpreted on regular basis to assess the risk
of LF transmission. Essentially, vector surveillance provides the scientific evidence required to make informed
decisions about the most effective strategies to control mosquito populations and ultimately, LF transmission.
It is also important to assess the presence of filarial parasites in vectors by dissecting the adult vector mosquito
or by using molecular technique. This data helps in determining the impact of control activities and guide
for interventions in the target areas with the highest risk. In elimination settings presence of mf in infected
mosquito is indicative for probability of local transmission or any residual foci which needs immediate vector
control interventions.
11.3.1 Adult vector surveillance
For study of various aspects of adult vector mosquitoes, samples are collected using various methods. For
entomological surveillance has to be carried out from sentinel and random sites based on epidemiological
criteria. The selection of sites and different adult collection methods are as follows.
11.3.1.1. Selection of sites for entomological surveillance
For entomological surveillance , two sentinel sites have to be identified on the basis of past Mf survey data
one in rural area and one in an urban area. The sentinel site will remain unchanged during the post-MDA
surveillance period. Similarly, collection should be made from two random sites one each from rural and
urban areas. The random sites should be selected each year afresh by multi-stage random sampling method.
From each of the sentinel and random sites, adult mosquito collections should be made from 10 catching
stations spending 15 minutes at each station using a flash light and aspirator tube (Hand collection Technique)
in the early morning between 6 to 10 am from resting sites in the human and mixed dwellings.
The density of the adult LF vector mosquitoes needs to be calculated for taking programmatic decisions locally
and for sharing with the entomology division of NCVBDC (state and HQs) using the prescribed reporting
format (EF 2 of the IVM manual). All the female LF vectors shall be dissected to detect the filarial infection
(Microfilariae). A minimum of three collections, at an interval of 10 days shall be carried out from each site
during October-November.
11.3.1.2. Programme perspective for entomological surveillance
Acquiring LF is a slow process, typically requiring numerous infected mosquito bites over months or years.
Entomological surveillance is a critical activity for LF elimination to guide the programme officials in assessing
the filaria vector density and infection rate prior or during various programme activities as described below:
1. Pre-Mass Drug Administration (Pre-MDA): In the Pre-MDA phase, entomological surveillance is
essential for understanding baseline vector dynamics and infection prevalence to guide MDA campaigns.
This data is useful for MDA planning, identifying hotspots with higher vector densities and infection rates,
if any, for targeted interventions.
2. Pre-Transmission Assessment Survey (Pre-TAS): The objective of entomological surveillance during
Pre-TAS is to assess if vector infection rates have declined sufficiently to proceed to TAS. LF vectors
collection and dissection activities need to be continued between TAS 1 – TAS 2 and TAS 2 – TAS 3.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

3. Post-Transmission Assessment Survey (Post-TAS): After successful TAS, Post-TAS entomological
surveillance is to be carried out to confirm elimination and to monitor potential resurgence in the locality.
This should be continued yearly to monitor for the potential resurgence/reintroduction till elimination is
validated.
In areas with high population movement or where vector density remains notably high, post-TAS
surveillance has to be prioritized, as these areas are at higher risk of LF reintroduction. Adult vectors are
to be dissected to identify parasite stages or xenomonitoring or xeno-surveillance using PCR is employed
to detect parasite DNA in vectors. The process of xenomonitoring is briefly described below.
Currently vector surveillance is being done as part of post MDA surveillance for which funds are being
allocated in NHM PIP.
4. Xenomonitoring
Xenomonitoring, also known as xeno-surveillance, is a vital entomological technique in LF elimination.
This indirect approach plays a crucial role in monitoring LF transmission and guiding control efforts.
Xenomonitoring can directly detect LF parasites within mosquito vectors using polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) techniques. This method gains prominence during post-Mass Drug Administration (MDA)
surveillance to identify potential resurgence of infections. During xenomonitoring, mosquito samples
are typically analyzed in groups (pools), with the pool size depending on the estimated prevalence of
infection in the area. The recommended sample size for xenomonitoring is a pool of 25 properly dried
gravid, semi-gravid, or full-fed Cx. quinquefasciatus mosquitoes. These samples should be carefully
packed and shipped to designated laboratories with detailed information regarding collection date, time,
and location. Beyond parasite detection, xenomonitoring also plays a vital role in vector incrimination. To
ensure representative data, collection sites to be selected strategically across various locations, considering
the inherent variability in LF infection rates among human populations.
11.3.1.3. Adult collection techniques
Hand collection: Hand collections of mosquitoes are performed using an oral or battery-powered mechanical
aspirator (Figure-11.7 A&B). Mosquitoes are collected using a torch or flashlight. This method allows for
targeted collection of mosquitoes in their resting habitats enabling for their study. This method is used for
calculation of man-hour density of adult vectors.
(A)
(B)
Figure-11.7: Aspirators: (A) Oral aspirator & (B) Mechanical aspirator
Spray sheet collection: Spray sheet collection is a method that involves using a pyrethrum space spray to
knock down mosquitoes inside a house. It allows for quantitative studies, including measuring indoor resting
density in terms of per room density of adult vectors. This method is useful when mosquito density is very low
or not easily detected by other methods.
Human landing collection: As extensive information on the biting and feeding behaviour of LF vector are
available, this method is not recommended. The risk of infection of other VBDs prevalent in the area raises
significant ethical concerns for the participants when employing mosquito-landing collections.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Trap collection: There are various types of traps used for collecting adult mosquitoes, including attractant
traps (such as light traps, CO2 traps, or chemical bait traps) and gravid traps. Traps are used as a surveillance
tool when the adult vectors are not easily detected by hand collection method.
11.3.2 Larval collection
The collection of mosquito larvae helps in identifying predominant breeding sites in an area, determining
larval density and evaluating the effectiveness of larval control activities. Several methods are available for
sampling larvae, however under the programme dipping, netting, and pipetting techniques are used for
collecting Culex larvae.
Mapping the breeding habitats of LF vectors should be undertaken in each EU. Larval collection needs to
be carried out from all potential breeding habitats. During adult collections in sentinel and random sites,
larval collection should be carried out in breeding habitats in those areas to asses the impact of vector control
interventions.
11.3.2.1 Larval collection techniques
Though several methods are available for sampling larvae, commonly used methods such as dipping, netting,
and pipetting are suitable for collecting Culex larvae.
Dipping: This method is commonly employed for collection in larger water bodies.
To minimize disruption, the dipper should be gently lowered at approximately a 45°
angle (Figure-11.8). It can be skimmed across the water surface or gradually immersed
to allow water and nearby larvae to flow into it. Subsequently, larvae can be collected
from the dipper using a pipette and transferred to a properly labelled bottle or vial. It
is important to note the number of dips taken at each breeding site to calculate larval
density, additionally, the time spent on collection should be recorded.
Netting: The netting method involves using a fine mesh net mounted on a handle, with a plastic bottle or tube
attached to one end. It is particularly useful for collecting larvae and pupae in water bodies like ponds and
small lakes. The net should be held at an angle of around 45° to the water surface and dragged across it. As the
net moves, larvae and pupae can be captured and collected in the attached plastic bottle.
Pipetting: This method allows for targeted sampling in small breeding sites like puddles, hoof-prints and
polluted water containers to collect larvae effectively.
Mansonia larvae, which are generally attached to submerged plant roots, can be challenging to collect due to
their specific habitat requirements.
The larval density of LF vector mosquitoes needs to be calculated, for taking programmatic decisions locally
and for sharing with the entomology division of NCVBDC (state and HQs) using the prescribed reporting
format (EF 10 of the IVM manual).
11.3.3. Entomological parameters
For surveillance of filaria vectors, various parameters like vector density, Per dip density for larva, Infection
rate, Infectivity rate and Mean number of L3/ infective mosquito are monitored. This helps in planning
and data-based decision making for improving the strategies. (Refer updated Manual of IVM for details of
calculations). Results are to be maintained properly and analysed timely.
Figure-11.8: Dipping
method of larva collection

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Following parameters are generally used to determine infection in vector and its epidemiological implication:
Note - Stages of mf larva: L I- Stage 1 larva or sausage stage larva, L II- Stage 2 larva or pre-infective stage larva
and L III- Stage 3 larva or infective stage larva.
Reporting format EF-6 of IVM manual is used for submitting the detailed report of vector dissection to
NCVBDC HQs. However, for submission of comprehensive report following format can be used:
Reporting format for LF entomological data
Name of State/UT:

Name/Number of EU:
Period of data collection:

Date of reporting:
1. Ten Man-hour Vector Density = ___________________________________________x 10
No. of female Cx. quinquefasciatus collected
No. of man-hours spent for mosquito collection
2. Per dip density for larva = ___________________________________________
Total number of larvae collected
Total number of dips taken
Mf % = ___________________________________________x 100
Positive for mf stages in adult vector mosquitoes
Total number of adult female vectors dissected
3. Percentage of mf in vector- Understanding the presence of human mf carriers in the vicinity of collection.
It is calculated as under:
4. Infection Rate- Proportion of female vectors containing larval stages I &II and developed (III) forms of
filarial parasite. It is calculated as under:
Infection Rate = ___________________________________________________________x 100
Number of female vectors with I, II and III stages of parasite
Total number of female vectors dissected
Significance: Crude index to understand the extent of sources of human infection
5. Infectivity Rate- Proportion of vector females with developed stage (III) only. It is calculated as under:
Infectivity rate = ___________________________________________________________x 100
Number of vector females with III stage alone
Total number of vector females dissected
6. Average number of infective larvae per infective mosquito
Mean no. of L III/infective mosquitoes = ________________________________________________
No. of infective larvae (L III) found
No. of infective mosquitoes

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Indices
Sites
S-1
S-2
R-1
R-2
10 MHVD@
Infection rate
Infectivity rate
Mean mosquito
infectivity
S = Sentinel site; R = Random site; @ 10 Man-hour vector density.
The annual report should be sent timely to NCVBDC Delhi (to both Entomology and LF Divisions) immediately
after data collection. All entomological reports to be submitted on IHIP once it is made operational.
11.4 Vector Control
Vector control is a crucial component in the elimination of LF and depends on the specific vector species and
local ecology. As mentioned earlier, it was an integral part of erstwhile National Filaria Control Programme.
Integrated vector management approaches combining multiple methods are often recommended for the
effective and sustainable control of both larvae and adult LF vectors.
11.4.1 Anti- larval measures
Anti-larval measures, involve identifying and eliminating mosquito-breeding sites to reduce vector
populations. This strategy includes activities such as proper waste management, drainage improvement, and
the use of biological control agents. Additionally, larviciding, the application of larvicides to target mosquito
larvae, can be employed to suppress vector populations in specific breeding sites. The primary LF vector Cx.
quinquefasciatus breeds in polluted water.
11.4.1.1 Environmental modification and manipulation
Environmental modification and manipulation involve various methods to alter breeding sites to reduce
mosquito populations such as removal of vegetation / aquatic weeds, elimination of stagnant water bodies,
fluctuating water levels, draining, channelizing, filling of the small pits and ditches. This is a cost-effective
strategy for larval control, as it focuses on eliminating habitats known to be conducive for the larvae of filaria
vectors. Proper solid waste management, environmental modifications, and improved drainage (without
blockage) can help minimize breeding sites and prevent mosquito population growth. Channelizing stagnant
pools of polluted water is recommended to prevent Culex breeding. For preventing Mansonia breeding,
aquatic vegetation such as Pistia, Salvinia, and Eichhornia should be regularly removed from ponds or large
water bodies where B. malayi is prevalent.
11.4.1.2 Chemical Control
Chemical control involves the targeted application of chemicals for vectors. It includes use of both larvicides
and adulticides for specific target vectors. Temephos, used as a larvicide, is suitable for clean water not for
polluted water. Insect growth regulators, namely Pyriproxyfen (GR) 0.5% and Diflubenzuron (WP) 25% are
currently recommended under the programme which can be used for polluted water based on the operational
feasibility of the targeted breeding habitats.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Mosquito Larvicidal Oil (MLO): MLO has been used for a considerable time and remains in use. MLO
suffocates mosquito larvae by creating a film on the water surface, cutting off their air supply, blocking
their respiratory tubes with oil particles, and reducing surface tension, causing the larvae to drown. Cx.
quinquefasciatus also breeds in unused wells, cesspits, and soakage pits. MLO can be applied in unused wells,
polluted drains & ditches, cesspits, soakage pits etc.
11.4.1.3 Biological Control
Larvivorous fish: Using fish is a natural and environmentally friendly approach to controlling mosquito
populations, including filaria vectors. Poecilia reticulata (Guppy), the common guppy can survive in polluted
water and can be used as a biological tool. Certain indigenous fish species are known to feed on mosquito
larvae in polluted water and may be used effectively to control larvae in larger breeding sites. These fishes are
self-perpetuating and therefore, is cost effective.
Bacteria: An endotoxin-producing bacterium, Bacillus thuringiensis var. israelensis (Bti), is an effective
mosquito control agent and is commonly used as a bio- larvicide in vector control programme. This naturally
occurring bacterium produces toxins that are lethal to the larvae of various mosquito species, including
LF vectors. Currently, two formulations of Bti - wettable powder (WP) and aqueous suspension (AS) are
recommended under the programme for polluted water. Refer to NCVBDC guidelines for dosage, frequency
of various formulations and updates.
11.4.2 Anti-adult measures
Cx. quinquefasciatus is reported to be resistant to most of the insecticides used under the programme. Thus,
indoor residual spray (IRS) is not recommended for LF vector control. Some effective adult vector control
methods for LF include, personal protection and physical/mechanical methods.
Note: For recommended methods of vector control, dosage and concentrations of insecticides, refer to the
updated Manual on IVM and the NCVBDC website, https://ncvbdc.mohfw.gov.in/. Programme officials/
entomologists should refer to this list for approved products. This list is dynamic and updated from time to
time.
11.4.2.1 Personal Protective Measures
Personal protective measures are helpful to reduce the risk of LF transmission by preventing mosquito bites.
-
Use of Mosquito Nets: Sleeping under bed nets prevent mosquito bites during night time. LF vector bites
during the night time. LLINs provided by the programme in malaria endemic areas can provide collateral
benefits to LF if used properly.
-
Use of Repellents: Repellents are a commonly used for personal protection against mosquitoes and other
biting insects. Household insecticidal products like mosquito coils, pyrethrum space spray and aerosols are
used extensively for personal protection against mosquitoes. Electric vaporizer mats and liquid vaporizers
are common that are commercially available in open market.
-
Wearing of Protective Clothing: Wearing of full sleeved cloths helps in reducing the exposure for
mosquito bites especially during peak mosquito activity times (dawn and dusk).

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

11.4.2.2 Physical and mechanical methods
Physical and mechanical control methods aim to prevent mosquito bites and limit their entry into houses.
These can be used as supplementary interventions. Here are some examples of these methods:
-
House Improvement: There are studies indicating maintaining a clean-living environment and proper
lighting can help in reducing LF vector mosquito resting in the human dwellings.
-
Screening or use of wire mesh: Housing improvements by screening or use of iron mesh on doors and
windows are usually practiced to block the entry of vector mosquitoes creating a physical barrier. Ensuring
intact and properly fitted screens is essential for effectiveness of this method.
For effective vector control community awareness has long been recognized as critical in the prevention and
elimination of LF.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Chapter-12
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF
PROGRAMME MANAGERS, MEDICAL
OFFICERS, AND HEALTH STAFF
-
The programme managers of LF elimination programme at national, state, district, and block level
along with the supervisory staff and the drug administrators will have specific responsibilities on
MDA and MMDP for successful implementation of the programme.
12.1 Roles and responsibilities of programme managers
The programme managers of LF elimination programme at national, state, district and PHC level and the
supervisory staff and the drug administrators will have several responsibilities on MDA and MMDP. Good
teamwork and complimenting and sharing the responsibilities among the team members at different levels is
important to effectively implement the multifarious programme activities.
Programme
activities
Responsibilities of
National Programme
Manager
Responsibilities of State
Programme Officer
Responsibilities of VBDCO/
DMO/PO at district level
Coordination and
management
Coordination with allied
ministries and facilitate
meeting with national level
leadership to update on LF
elimination activities and
seek support.
Coordination with allied
departments and facilitate
meeting with state level
leadership to update on LF
elimination activities and
seek support.
Coordination with allied
departments and facilitate
meeting with DM/DC to update
to update on LF elimination
activities and seek support.
Organization of
meetings and
workshops
Constituting the National
Technical Advisory
Committee.
Periodic update with policy
making bodies like NITI
Aayog
Organizing the meetings to
formulate/update strategies,
policies and guidelines of
the programme.
Conducting TAC meetings
to develop technical
guidelines and issues from
state programmes.
Organizing MDA and
MMDP workshops for
SPOs, involving experts and
resource persons
Constituting the State
Technical Advisory
Committee.
Conducting TAC meetings
to provide technical support
to districts and blocks.
Conducting workshops for
VBDCOs/ DMOs, involving
experts and resource
persons to capacitate staff on
programme guidelines.
Constituting the District/Block
Coordination Committee
Organization of DCC/Block
meetings
Conducting workshops for
PHC medical officers, involving
experts and resource persons to
capacitate staff on programme
guidelines.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Programme
activities
Responsibilities of
National Programme
Manager
Responsibilities of State
Programme Officer
Responsibilities of VBDCO/
DMO/PO at district level
Drug procurement
Consolidating the quantity
of drugs required for the
national programme, and
take steps to procure DEC,
Albendazole and Ivermectin
through standard processes.
Providing direction on
shipment of drugs to
different states.
Estimation of the quantity
of MDA drugs and general
medicines for management
of adverse events required
for the state and submit the
indent to the Directorate of
NCVBDC in time.
Collection and transport of
drugs from the port to the
state headquarters
Estimation and procurement
and supply of medicines and
other commodities required
for MMDP activities.
Estimation of the quantity
of drugs required based on
population of the districts and
submit to SPO the details on
quantity of drugs required for the
district.
Assessment of the quantum of
general medicines required for
adverse events and providing the
details to SPO.
Collection and transportation of
drugs from state headquarters
to district headquarters and to
different PHCs within the district
-Estimation of medicines and
other commodities required for
MMDP activities and submitting
the same to SPO
Training activities
Designing and development
of training manuals,
training material standard
presentations for national,
state, district and PHC level
programme, in English and
Hindi, through engagement
of LF experts and training
professionals, on MDA and
MMDP
Organizing national training
programme for batches
of SPOs and trainers on
technical components.
Translation and necessary
(minor) modification
of training manuals,
training material standard
presentation. presentations
in local language, for state,
district and PHC level, on
MDA and MMDP
Organizing state training
programme for batches of
VBDCOs/District VBD
officers and trainers on
technical components.
Develop training calendar.
Organizing training programmes
for PHC medical officers and
senior PHC staff members on
MDA and MMDP
Share training materials, data
on previous MDA indicators in
advance with the blocks.
Advocacy activities Development of broad
advocacy guidelines for
national, state and district
level implementation.
Implementation of advocacy
activities at national level
with focus
on media and allied
stakeholders.
Positioning the LF
elimination programme
through national print and
electronic media channels
for MDA programme.
Enlisting the support of
central ministries, MPs
and celebrities to enhance
visibility of the programme
Develop advocacy plan for
MDA and MMDP.
Implementation of advocacy
at state level, based on
national programme
guidelines.
Organise media events.
Positioning the LF
elimination programme
through state print and
electronic media channels
for MDA programme.
Enlisting the support of
local ministries, MLAs
and celebrities to enhance
visibility of the programme
Develop advocacy plan advocacy
at district level.
Organise media events.
Engage patient networks as
influencers.
Enlisting the support of MLAs
and high officials and prominent
personalities of the district to
propagate the programme.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Programme
activities
Responsibilities of
National Programme
Manager
Responsibilities of State
Programme Officer
Responsibilities of VBDCO/
DMO/PO at district level
Social Mobilisation
activities
Development of broad social
mobilization strategies and
guidelines and messages
with the help of experts and
professional bodies
Development of prototype
of IEC materials by
engaging experts and
professionals and providing
the same to endemic states
and union territories
Development and
implementation of social
mobilization strategies
within the state, considering
the best practices in other
health programmes and local
context.
Adopting IEC material in
local language based on
prototypes provided by the
national programme and
timely sharing it with the
districts.
Facilitate districts to timely
engagement of MSG
approved support for MDA
Implementation of social
mobilization strategies vigorously
within the rural and urban areas
of district, with the objective
of maximum participation
of communities in MDA
programme.
Distribution of IEC materials to
PHCs/UHCs and HSCs.
Timely procurement of IEC
materials.
Develop engagement plan for
local NGOs, IMA, IAP, CSR and
local clubs.
Facilitate timely onboard of MSG
support at district and block
level.
MDA
Implementation
Development and provision
of guidelines on MDA
implementation and Ensure
implementation of MDA as
per plan and guidelines.
Supervision and support the
states in implementation.
Periodic reviews prior,
during and after completion
of MDA with the states
Coordination of MDA
implementation in endemic
states
Coordination and
Implementation of MDA
in all endemic districts per
guidelines of the national
programme
Timely update of MDA
preparedness tracker
Periodic reviews with
districts and blocks under
MDA.
Daily review with the
districts
Undertaking field visits
to districts to assess the
programme implementation.
and providing spot guidance,
if necessary
Implementation of MDA in all
villages and urban centres in the
district/block per guidelines of
the national programme
Ensure trained teams implement
the MDA.
Daily review meetings
Undertaking field visits to PHCs
and
villages and assess the
programme implementation
Management of
adverse events
Development of guidelines
on safety of preventive
chemotherapy and
management of adverse
events in consultation with
experts in Pharmacology,
General Medicine, Public
Health, Epidemiologists and
Social Scientists
Development of guidelines
on management and
reporting and investigation
of severe adverse events
Dissemination of guidelines
on safety of preventive
chemotherapy and
management of adverse
events to all districts
Dissemination of guidelines
on management and
reporting and investigation
of severe adverse events
Providing support to the
PHCs and field teams
to manage adverse
events during the MDA
implementation and
undertaking field visits, if
any severe adverse events
occur.
Management of media and
community concerns if any
severe adverse events occur.
Dissemination of guidelines
on safety of preventive
chemotherapy and management
of adverse events to all PHCs
Dissemination of guidelines on
management and reporting and
investigation of severe adverse
events to all PHCs
Providing active support to
drug Administrator teams in the
management of adverse events
during the MDA implementation
and undertaking field visits, if
any severe adverse events occur
or too many people affected with
adverse events in any community.
Management of media and
community concerns if any
severe adverse events occur or
too many people affected with
adverse events in any community

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Programme
activities
Responsibilities of
National Programme
Manager
Responsibilities of State
Programme Officer
Responsibilities of VBDCO/
DMO/PO at district level
MMDP
implementation
Development and provision
of guidelines on MMDP
implementation.
Enumeration of patients
Minimum package of care
and its delivery to the
affected people.
Geographical coverage.
Strengthening of required
facilities in health centres
Prioritizing hydrocele
surgeries and engagement of
Medical Colleges
Develop a plan for
implementation of MMDP
component.
Coordination of MMDP
activities implementation
in all endemic districts per
guidelines.
Providing guidance to
districts in improving
health centre facilities and
designation of hospitals for
hydrocele surgeries
Periodically review and track
the MMDP activities at the
district level.
Implementation of MMDP
activities at the block level.
Designation of hospitals in the
districts for hydrocele surgeries.
Periodically review and track the
MMDP activities at the block
level
Confirmatory
mapping
Review of reports of LF
prevalence in hitherto
non-endemic districts
and advising states on
confirmatory mapping.
Review of reports of LF
prevalence in hitherto
non-endemic districts,
preliminary investigation in
suspected endemic areas and
reporting the outcomes to
the national programme.
Implementation of confirmatory
mapping surveys.
Monitoring
and evaluation
activities
Development of monitoring
and evaluation framework
and guidelines.
Coordination of monitoring
and evaluation activities.
Provide technical support to
states.
Implement periodic
independent evaluation of
national programme
Organise Joint Monitoring
Missions for strengthening
the programme.
Build technical capacity to
implement the M & E in the
state.
Develop monitoring plan.
Coordination of M & E
activities in the state.
Provide technical support to
districts.
Provide support to during
the independent evaluation.
Timely implementation of of M
& E activities in the district.
Develop monitoring plan.
Submit the M & E reports to the
state office within the timelines.
Undertake follow-up action
whenever necessary (Ex.: TAS
failure)
Provide support if independent
evaluation takes place in the
district.
Data management
Establishment of a robust
national programme
database that includes all
essential data on mapping,
MDA, MMDP, NBS,
TAS and monitoring and
evaluation.
Establishment of a robust
state programme database
that includes all essential
data on mapping, MDA,
MMDP, NBS and TAS and
monitoring and evaluation.
Share date with the national
programme office regularly.
Establishment of a robust
district programme database
that includes all essential data
on mapping, MDA, MMDP,
NBS and TAS and monitoring
evaluation.
Share date with the state
programme office regularly.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Programme
activities
Responsibilities of
National Programme
Manager
Responsibilities of State
Programme Officer
Responsibilities of VBDCO/
DMO/PO at district level
Budget, allocation,
utilization of funds
and financial
statements
Formulating budget
proposal and mobilizing
necessary funding for the
programme from Central
government
Providing guidelines on
fund utilization
Apportioning of funds
for various programme
activities
Allocation of funds to
different states and union
territories
Obtaining all expenditure
statements from states and
preparation of expenditure
report and submission of
UCs
Mobilizing necessary
funding for the programme
from State government
Apportioning of funds to
various programme activities
per central programme
guidelines
Utilization of funds for
various activities as per
approved budgets
Allocation of funds to
different districts
Obtaining all bills and
vouchers and expenditure
statements from districts and
preparation of expenditure
report
Apportioning of funds to various
programme activities per central
and state programme guidelines
Utilization of funds for various
activities per central and state
programme guidelines
Allocation of funds to different
PHCs
Obtaining all bills and vouchers
and expenditure statements
from PHCs and preparation of
expenditure report
Operational
Research
Networking and
collaboration with national
and international research
institutions, promoting and
undertaking research to
resolve operational issues of
the programme
Promoting and
incorporating new
diagnostic tools and
intervention strategies into
national programmes
Implementation of research
agenda and projects in
collaboration with research
and academic organizations
within the state
Piloting, adopting and
implementing new
diagnostic tools and
intervention strategies into
the programme
Supporting and participating
in research projects and
investigations
Operationalization and
implementation of new
diagnostic tools and intervention
strategies
Partnership and
collaboration
Engage with national and
international stakeholders
such as World Health
Organizations, National
NGOs, public and private
sector, medical colleges, and
allied bodies like IMA to
achieve LF elimination
Partnership and
collaboration with state
level academic institutions,
research organizations,
medical colleges and
hospitals and NGOs to
achieve LF elimination
Partnership with local academic
institutions, medical colleges and
hospitals and NGOs to achieve
LF elimination.
Preparation of
LF elimination
validation dossier
Preparation of the national
Pre-LF elimination
validation dossier and
updating it time to time,
through inputs of state
programmes
Preparation of the final
national LF elimination
validation dossier in
standard format and
submitting the same to
WHO
Taking all necessary steps
to attain the LF elimination
validation acknowledgment
from WHO
Preparation of the state PreLF elimination validation
dossier and updating it time
to time
Providing all the necessary
data and inputs to the central
programme to facilitate
preparation of the final
LF elimination validation
dossier.
Submission of data records
with the visiting expert team,
as part of LF elimination
validation process
Providing all the programme data
in standard formats to the SPO
time to time
Keeping all the data records to
provide the same to the visiting
expert team, as part of LF
elimination validation process

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Programme
activities
Responsibilities of
National Programme
Manager
Responsibilities of State
Programme Officer
Responsibilities of VBDCO/
DMO/PO at district level
Post-validation
surveillance
activities
Developing the strategy
and guidelines on postvalidation surveillance
Providing the guidance
to the state programmes
to implement the postvalidation surveillance
activities
Providing inputs for the
development of strategy and
guidelines on post-validation
surveillance
Adapt, plan and implement
the post-validation
surveillance strategy in all
endemic districts
Implement the post-validation
surveillance strategy in the
district/block
12.2 Roles and responsibilities of PHC/UHC Medical Officer and Municipal
Health officer
Leadership and
planning
MDA preparation
MDA
implementation
MMDP
implementation
Lead and coordination
of implementation
of all programme
activities in PHC area/
Municipal wards.
Development of a
robust PHC microplan, together with
PHC staff, for effective
implementation of
MDA and MMDP
activities
Motivation of staff
to treat all eligible
individuals and
accomplish highest
treatment coverage
of >90% amongst the
eligible population.
Guiding the staff
to develop microplans for each
village/municipal
ward for effective
implementation of
MDA, with focus
on allotment of
households to drug
administration teams,
repeated visits of
teams to households,
directly observed
consumption,
accomplishing the
treatment coverage
targets, and dealing
with non-compliance
and adverse events.
Lead and coordination of
enumeration of households
and population, using MDA
registers, for each village/
municipal ward and arriving
at target population figures.
Calculation of drugs required
for individual villages/urban
wards and prepare a list and
submit the same to District
Programme Office.
Keeping all IEC material,
all data forms and MDA
information sheets in place
early, distributing the same
to target villages/municipal
wards in time and ensuring
timely display/distribution
for the MDA programme
Conducting meeting of
panchayat leaders of villages/
municipal councillors,
presenting them the
objectives and goals of
the MDA programme and
enlisting their support.
Preparing lists of villagewise number of teams and
drug administrators required
to implement MDA and
guiding the PHC staff in and
ensuring their recruitment in
each village/municipal ward,
per guidelines.
Leading and coordinating
implementation of MDA in
all PHC villages/municipal
wards through mobile
communication with
supervisory staff and drug
administrator teams and
undertaking field visits.
Day to day monitoring
of village-wise treatment
coverage and ensuring high
treatment coverage in all
villages/municipal wards,
with additional support
wherever required.
Leading and coordinating
management of adverse
events, providing on-site
support to villages affected
by more adverse events or
severe adverse events.
Receiving all completed
MDA data forms from all
villages/municipal wards,
preparation of consolidated
report for PHC and
discussing the outcome of
MDA with PHC staff.
Submitting the MDA data
and consolidated report
to the DPO, based on
feedback received from
supervisory staff and drug
administrators.
Ensure MMDP activities
implementation/ services at
PHC and SHC.
Enumeration of lymphedema
and hydrocele cases, through
house-to-house survey, in all
villages and municipal wards.
Home based and PHC/
SHC based training of
lymphedema patients on
management of disease
conditions.
Providing at PHC/SHC
necessary treatment to
chronic disease patients, as
and when required
Contacting and counselling
all the hydrocele patients
to undergo surgical
intervention.
Integration of MMDP
services with existing health
facilities.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Leadership and
planning
MDA preparation
MDA
implementation
MMDP
implementation
Training of PHC
staff members and
other volunteers/drug
administrators on MDA
implementation and MMDP
implementation, using the
training material provided by
the SPO and the services of
LF experts and DVBDCO/
DMO.
Transfer of funds to medical
colleges for conduct of CES
immediately after completion
of MDA activity.
Identification of low
consumption areas based on
previous MDA.
Identification, training,
planning and handholding
the MSG approved support.
Receiving the funds allocated
to PHC/Municipality
from DPO and managing
the funds to implement
the MDA and MMDP
programmes.
Prompt disbursal of
incentives, through PHC
staff, to drug administrators
who participated in MDA
programme.
Evening debriefing during
MDA.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

12.3 Roles and responsibilities of supervisory staff, Drug Administrators and
Health Workers
Supervisory staff
Drug Administrators (MDA)
Drug Administrators/Health
workers (MMDP)
Get familiarized with areas in the
village/s to be covered by MDA teams
under his/her supervision.
Brief the community leaders, youth
and women’s groups in the villages/
municipal wards during drug
administration activity and enlisting
their support.
Interact with and leading the
teams under supervision in
effective implementation of drug
administration activities.
Day to day monitoring of village
and team-wise treatment coverage
accomplished, ensuring repeated
visits of teams to all households to
treat all eligible household members.
Close supervision of monitoring of
adverse events, providing necessary
support to DA teams to deal with
adverse events.
Visit the non-compliance households,
with the help of influential
community members, and convince
them to participate in treatment.
Supervision of and supporting the
teams in correct data recording
and consolidation of village- wise
treatment coverage data and
preparation of MDA report
Provide feedback to the PHC medical
officer on the best practices of
MDA and problems encountered in
implementation of MDA in his/her
area.
Undertake refusal conversion during
the monitoring.
Get familiarized with areas and
households in the village or
municipal ward to be covered by
MDA by his/her team.
Have a clear idea of his/her team’s
total number of target households,
their location and target population.
Collect and have identification
card, adequate quantity of drugs,
information sheet, data forms etc.
and other supporting materials
required for drug administration.
Effective administration of drugs to
members of target households and
work as per micorplans.
Clarify the doubts of community
members on drugs and MDA, if
necessary, by involving supervisory
staff.
Revisit houses where household
members were absent at the time of
drug administration or houses were
locked.
Make additional visits to noncompliance households and convince
the members to adhere to DOC and
seek support from the identified local
influencers.
Recording the MDA data in standard
data sheets accurately.
Closely monitor the incidence
of adverse events and provide
supportive treatment to the affected,
whenever necessary and inform
MoIC as necessary.
Return the remaining drugs to the
supervisory staff, with a note on
quantum of drugs remaining.
Check the data forms and returning
the completed data forms to
supervisory staff or PHCs.
House to house enumeration of
chronic LF disease patients
Contact the lymphedema patients
and train them on lymphedema
management measures at home or
PHC, per the timeline and work plan
developed by the PHC.
Contact the hydrocele patients
and counsel the patient to undergo
surgical intervention and explain the
benefits.
Record the data on training of
lymphedema patients in standard
format.
Keep and update the list of hydrocele
patients counselled and patients
underwent surgical intervention in
standard format.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Annexures: 1
DETAILS OF TASK FORCE/COORDINATION COMMITTEE MEETINGS
Name of the
Meeting
Chaired by
Key Participants
Terms of Reference
Timelines
National Technical Expert
Committee (NTEC) is
constituted by the MOH &
FW to advise the programme
on technical aspects,
formulation of policies,
&recommendations.
Director General
of Health Services,
MOH&FW
Technical Experts (7-9 experts),
Director-NCVBDC. Representatives/
Technical Experts from WHO,
ICMR, NCDC, Medical college
professors, State Programme Officers
of LF (2-3), Member Secretary
(National Programme Manager,
NCVBDC)
To Review and update national policies for
lymphatic filariasis elimination, Review and update
the national objectives and the elimination strategy
Review the status of LF elimination situation in
the country, suggest changes in the programme
based on situation analysis and programme review,
research, intersectoral convergence, to provide
technical inputs and guidance from time to time to
achieve elimination of LF from the country.
The committee will meet yearly twice
or whenever required to address any
issue.
State Task Force (STF) to
perceive importance of NTD
like LF/VL/Leprosy & direct
concerning dept to issue
instructions to all districts
for extending cooperation.
Minister of Health
& Family Welfare of
the State
Chief Secretary (Vice Chair),
Addl. Chief Secretary, Health
Secretary, Secretary (Finance),
Secretary (Tribal), Secretary (ICDS),
Secretary (Social Welfare), Secretary
(Irrigation), Secretary (Rural
Development/ Panchayat Raj),
Secretary (Agriculture), Secretary
(Local Self Govt), Secretary
(Industry), Secretary (Forests),
Secretary (Information), Secretary
Education),Mission Director(NHM),
Director General of Health
Services (State)/ Director of Health
Services and State Programme
Officer(Member Secretary), WHO
and partners
Review the progress of implementation and
performance, impact of MDA for ELF, policy
decisions and modifications wherever warranted,
to identify the roles & responsibilities of different
departments for successful implementation of ELF,
release of sufficient funds for ELF, etc.
To list the areas on which other dept should
collaborate & issue instructions
1st STF meeting is to be held
90 days before MDA,2nd STF
meeting one month before MDA
and 3RD meeting one-and-a-halfmonths after MDA to review the
performance. The recommendations
made in each STF meeting will be
communicated to all the members
with a copy endorsed to the MoHFW
(GOI), Directorate General of Health
Services (GOI) and Directorate
of NCVBDC within 15 days of
holding the meeting. The Action
Taken Report is to be submitted to
Member-Secretary by the concerned
departments within a fortnight after
receipt of STF recommendations

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Name of the
Meeting
Chaired by
Key Participants
Terms of Reference
Timelines
State Technical Advisory
Committee (STAC)
Director General
of Health Services
(State) /Director
of Health Services
(State)
Director of Medical Education &
Research, Director of Indian System
of Medicine, Director of State Health
Education Bureau, Prof. & HoD
of Pharmacology, Prof & HoD of
Medicine, Prof. & HoD of PSM, Prof.
& HoD of Paediatrics, Prof. & HoD
of Microbiology, Regional Director
of ROH&FW, President of Indian
Medical Association (State Branch),
Nodal state programme manager
under NHM, Health Officer of
Railways/ ESI/ Municipal Hospital
/ Centre/ IMA representative
and State Programme Officer of
Malaria & Filaria or VBD (Member
Secretary), WHO & partners
Review the administrative, financial & logistics for
ELF, functioning of State and District Societies,
technical inputs for ELF, morbidity management
of filaria cases, capacity building, performance &
impact assessment, review the reporting system,
inter-sectoral coordination, integrated vector
control measures, operational problems, etc
The first meeting of STAC is to be
held about 90 days before MDA
(soon after STF meeting) the
second meeting a fortnight before
MDA and the third meeting one
month after MDA to review the
performance. The recommendations
made in each STAC meeting will be
communicated to all the members
with a copy endorsed to Directorate
of NCVBDC within 10 days of
holding the meeting.
The Action Taken Report is to be
submitted to Member-Secretary by
the concerned departments within
a fortnight after receipt of STAC
recommendations.
District Co-ordination
Committee (DCC)
District Magistrate/
District Collector
District level programme officer
for Filaria/District Medical Officer
(District Vector Borne Diseases
Control Officer) as Member
Secretary with other representatives
from public-private and WHO and
partners as members. The district
programme manager of NRHM
must be included as member of
DCC. It would be advisable to
include social sector department
such as education, youth affairs,
social welfare, rural development,
Panchayat, Municipal Corporation,
information and broadcasting,
Women & Child Development,
Zila Parishad, Rotary & Lion
Club, Red Cross etc. in the DCC.
Representation from professional
organisations/associations like SMA,
CII, IMA, FICCI, ASSOCHAM, etc.
may also be co-opted as members
besides NGOs.
Oversee the implementation of MDA programme
of districts and take appropriate measures deemed
fit to improve the consumption level of DEC tablets
and monitoring its impact through microfilaria
survey. During the 1st meeting, the members
should be informed about the purpose of single
dose mass drug administration and requested to
extend their co-operation by suitably instructing
their line staff in the periphery to co-operate in
the programme. The National Deworming Day
for conducting MDA throughout the endemic
districts/PHCs and the preparatory work should
be discussed in the first DCC meeting; The 2nd
meeting of District level Coordination Committee
should be conducted to review the District Action
Plan (Manpower Assessment / Logistics- mobility
/ supervision, etc.) and preparedness for launching
the MDA and take appropriate measures to plug
the loopholes, if any.
First DCC meeting at least 90 days
prior to the actual date of MDA; 2nd
DCC meeting should be conducted
15 days in advance of the day of drug
administration. Post-MDA meeting
should focus on and review the
progress of MMDP strategy also.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Name of the
Meeting
Chaired by
Key Participants
Terms of Reference
Timelines
District/Urban Task Force
CMO/ACMO
NUHM or VBD
officer
A special urban task force should be
formed under the chairmanship of
the District Management. The main
members of the task force should
include Deputy CMO/ACMO
NUHM,
Municipal Commissioner,
Superintendent of the Sadar/District
hospital, Municipal Health Officer,
Deputy CMO in-charge NUHM,
District VBD/malaria officer, District
Program officer – Woman and child
department, District Education
Officer, Representatives from WHO
& partners , rotary, NGOs, religious
organizations, IMA and IAP, medical
/nursing college nodal person,
District IEC Officer, Public Health
Engineering, Representatives from
other relevant bodies
The main duty of the task force would be to
formulate a coherent MDA campaign plan through
inter-departmental and inter-sectoral coordination
in concurrence with the state task force meeting.
The urban task force should also review the
preparation of MDA, implementation and review
the MDA progress after completing the campaign
and help in taking important decisions, for midcourse correction.
1st Meeting before conducting MDA
and 2nd meeting during MDA and
3rd after completion of campaign
Block Coordination
Committee
Sub-Divisional
Magistrate
Block Coordination Committee to
be formed under Sub-Divisional
Magistrate. Block Medical Officer /
Nodal Medical Officer for Filaria
at Block as Member Secretary
with other representatives from
public-private and partner NGOs
as members. The block programme
manager of NRHM must be included
as member of BCC. Members from
other department such as education,
youth affairs, social welfare, rural
development, Panchayat, Municipal
Corporation, information and
broadcasting, Women & Child
Development, Zila Parishad, Rotary
& Lion Club, Red Cross etc. in the
BCC.
Implement the Block MDA campaign and take
appropriate measures as per the concurrence of
District Coordination Committee to improve
the consumption of MDA drugs. During the
1st meeting, the members should be informed
about the purpose of single dose mass drug
administration and requested to extend their cooperation by suitably instructing their line staff in
the periphery to co-operate in the programme. The
Pre- MDA preparatory work should be discussed
in the first BCC meeting; The 2nd meeting of
Block level Coordination Committee should
be conducted to review the Block Action Plan
(Manpower Assessment / Logistics- mobility /
supervision, etc.) and preparedness for launching
the MDA and take appropriate measures to plug
the loopholes, if any.
The 1st BCC meeting 30 days prior
to the actual date of MDA; 2nd BCC
meeting should be conducted 7
days in advance of the day of drug
administration.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Name of the
Meeting
Chaired by
Key Participants
Terms of Reference
Timelines
Block Task Force
Block Medical
Officer
The members Include the Block
Program officer of various
departments- Woman and
Child Development, Education,
Panchayati Raj, Social Welfare, Rural
Development and Youth Affairs.
Other members include from key
Partner Organizations, Rotary,
NGOs, Religious Organizations,
NYK, NSS and NCC etc.)
Ensure inter-departmental and inter-sectoral
coordination in concurrence with the District/
Urban task force meeting. The block task force
should also review the preparation of MDA,
implementation and review the MDA progress
after completing the campaign and help in taking
important decisions, for mid-course correction.
1st Meeting before conducting MDA
and 2nd meeting during MDA and
3rd after completion of campaign.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Annexures: 2
FAMILY REGISTER
Family Register – for enumeration (to be filled at Village level)
Name of Village/Urban area:
Date of Family Enumeration:
Name of Drug Administrator:
Household
no
Sl.No.
Name of
head of
household
Name of
Individual
Age
(in yrs)
Gender
(M/F/O)
Number of
DEC tablets
consumed
by
beneficiary
Number of
ALB tablets
consumed
by
beneficiary
Number
of IVR
tablets
consumed
by
beneficiary
Reasons
for not
consuming
all or any
drug#
Date of Drug
Consumption
(dd/mm/yyyy)
Any
Adverse
events
reported
(Write the
code)$
Whether
person has
may be
indicative of
Lymphedema
or hydrocele
(Y/N)**
Note:
(1) Administer tablet Ivermectin to children 6 year and above
(2) Children in the age group 2-5 years are to be administered DEC and Albendazole only
(3) Do not administer MDA drugs to children < 2 years, Pregnant Women, and seriously sick beneficiaries
# P- Pregnant,Y= Young, S=Sick, A=Absent, R=Refused, L=Locked, CB: Consumed at Booth O= Other [Specify]
$ 1-Fever/ 2- Headache /3- Dizziness/4-Vomitting / 5- Nausea /6- Abdominal Pain / 7- General Weakness / 8- Skin Rash / 9 -Others (specify)
**- Wherever a Y is recorded, the details of the person has to be also captured in the line listing format
Line listing of persons suspected to be affected by Lymphoedema or Hydrocele (Summary) – Family Register
S.No
Name of
individual
Age
Gender
(Male/
Female/
Other)
Part of body affected by Lymphedema Disease Affected Part (Put a tick under relevant part)
Mobile
number
Duration in
yrs of person’s
living in the
area
Rt Leg
Lt Leg
Rt Hand
LT Hand
Scrotum
Breastt
Other

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Annexures: 3
MICRO PLANS
Micro planning format for Village/urban area
State
District
Block:
Urban area/ Village
Name of the area:
Team No.
Drug Administr tor Name 1:
Mobile no.
Designation: ASHA/ AWW/ Volunteer/ Other_____________
Drug Administrator Name 2:
Mobile no.
Designation: ASHA/ AWW/ Volunteer/ Other_____________
Supervisor name:
Mobile no.
Designation:
a
CHC/ PHC/ Urban Unit:
Sub Center:
Village/ Ward/ Mohalla name:
RRT No.
Include dates for each day
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Tola/ Hamlet/ Mohalla/ Village
Head of the family member name and address of he first house
Head of the family member name and address of the last house
Total no of HHs from first to last house
Name and contact no. of the local influencer
Day 6
Day 7
Day 8
Day 9
Day 10
Tola/ Hamlet/ Mohalla/ Village
Head of the family member name and address of he first house
Head of the family member name and address of he last house
Total no of hhs from first to last house
Name and contact no. of the local influencer
Details and coverage date of schools/ brick kilns/ Construction sites/ migratory population (nomads):

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Booth Level Microplanning
District Name: Block Name: Supervisor Name: Designation:
Details about Booth
(Booth Includes – Hospitals, Market Areas, Congregation Sites, medical college OPDs, Bus Stand, Railway Station, Airports, Bus Stands, RWAs, Factories)
Day & Date of Activity
Booth Number
Booth Location
Name of DA
Name & Contact Details
of Local Influencers
DA 1 -
DA 2 -
DA 1 -
DA 2 -
DA 1 -
DA 2 -
DA 1 -
DA 2 -
DA 1 -
DA 2 -
DA 1 -
DA 2 -
DA 1 -
DA 2 -
DA 1 -
DA 2 -

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Annexures: 4
NIGHT BLOOD SURVEY MONITORING AND POST NBS ACTIVITY
MONITORING CHECK LIST
4 a) NBS Monitoring Format
State
District
Site Name
Site Type
Date of start of activity
Date of IEC as per plan
Date of monitoring
Name of the person monitored the
activity and designation:
Remarks
1.
Time at which Team has arrived at Spot ................................................................
Time
2.
Site same as per micro plan
Yes/No
3.
Any Logistic issue please encircle - Old greasy slide/Poor stain quality/Poor Quality Lancet/Others (Please specify)
4.
Composition of team as per micro plan. Name and Designation of absentee/s..............................
Yes/No
5.
Village level meeting or Prior communication about night Blood survey has been done in that area.
(date of communication................)
Yes/No
6.
Is the sample of 300 people per site for the night blood survey (NBS) chosen through random sampling?
Yes/No
7.
At what time the blood samples were collected
Time
8.
Serial number on Blood slide matches with the register.
Yes/No
9.
Blood slide collected with adequate amount of blood. (4 to 5 Drops/slide)
Yes/No
10.
Quality of blood slide: Smear size 20 mm*30 mm, uniformly spread, in centre of slide
Yes/No
11.
Blood slides are dried before packing.
Yes/No
12.
Number of Blood slides prepared by team till the time of visit .......................................

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

4 b) Checklist for Post NBS Activity Monitoring (All lab-facilities should be visited within 24 hrs after completion of the activity)
Name of Block/ Municipality
Remarks
Name of RH/ BPHC/ UPHC
Name of the monitoring person and designation:
1.
ALL SLIDES (at least 600 in Post MDA NBS/ 900 in Pre- TAS) are available in the Lab of the Block/Municipality
health facility
Yes/No
2.
Are all slides kept in proper manner inside the Slide- Boxes
Yes/No
Please check the slides (5% from each box) and monitor the following points
3.
Are All slide labeled properly as per the instructions given by the district
Yes/No
4.
Quality of the Thick smear is Satisfactory (Smear size 20 mm*30 mm, uniformly spread, in centre of slide)
Yes/No
% of Good Quality Sl
Please interview and check whether following logistics for staining and examination are available
5.
Distilled Water (atleast 3 lt for Post MDA/ Atleast 4.5lt for Pre-TAS)
Yes/No
6.
JSB1 Stain (atleast 1.8 lit for Post MDA/2.7lit for Pre- TAS)
Yes/No
7.
Concentrated HCL (Atleast 20ml for Post-MDA/30ml for Pre-TAS)
Yes/No
8.
Methanol (Atleast 1lit for Post MDA/1.5ml for Pre-TAS)
Yes/No
9.
Properly Maintained Microscope: Microscope type: Monocular/Binocular, Low power Lens: 5X or 10X
Yes/No
10.
Whether both 10X & 40X objective lens available (if No inform the District Nodal Person for immediate corrective
measures)
Yes/No
If the staining process is ongoing, try to observe the following points/ If it is completed before you reach try to assess whether the following steps were followed by interviewing
the LT
11.
Preparation of 2% Acid Alcohol Mixture was done Correctly
Yes/No
12.
Any other observations (Please specify) Time duration between collection of smear and dehemoglobinization,
whole smear stained, or partial smear stained, quality of staining and artefacts, use of 100X for species confirmation, method of cross-checking including selection of 10% negative slides and 100% positive slides
13.
Number of Blood slides matching with line list of population screened.
Yes/No

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Annexures: 5
LINE LISTING OF MF/AG POSITIVE PATIENTS
Annexure: Line Listing of Mf /Ag Positive Patients
Name of the State
Name of the District
S.No
Name
Age (in
years)
Gender
Phone
number
of Patient/
Guardian
Village Name
Name of the
sub-Centre
Name of the
Block/PHC/
CHC
Type of Survey
(1=MF Survey, 2=
Pre-TAS, 3=TAS,
4=Filaria Unit
Survey)
Type of Methodology
( 1= NBS, 2=Only
FTS,3=FTS followed
by NBS)
Result* (1= Mf
+ve,2=FTS +ve
and Mf+ve, 3=
FTS +ve and
Mf-ve)
Date of
Survey
(DD-MMYYYY)
* FTS +ve and Mf -ve case is treated but is not followed up
Have you taken/
consumed the
drugs during
MDA? (0= Never,
1=Once, 2=Twice,
>2=More than
two)
If consumed,
Year of last
consumption
of
MDA(YYYY)
Whether
Treatment
provided
after testing
positive (Yes/
No)
If Yes,
Date of
Initiation
of
Treatment
Date of
Completion
of Treatment
Treatment Details
(1=Single
Dose DA,
2=Single Dose
IDA,3=12 Day
DEC,4=Others)
Follow
Up Of
+ve cases
(Yes/No)
Date- 1st
follow up(6
months after
treatment
completion)
Status(MF
Positive/
MF
Negative)
Date-2nd
follow up
(12 months
after
treatment
completion)
Status(MF
Positive/
MF
Negative)
Whether
the patient
consumend
MDA drugs
in subsequent
round (Yes/No)
Date- 3rd follow up
(18 months after treatment completion)
Status (MF Positive/MF Negative)
Date-4th follow up
(24 months after treatment completion)
Status (MF Positive/MF
Negative)
Whether the patient consumed
MDA drugs in subsequent round
(Yes/No)

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Annexures: 6
PATIENT CARD
Patient Card
Patient Information
Clinical summary and remarks for
follow up, ADL or any acute illness for
that patient visited hospital
How to do Morbidity Management
(Pictorial messages in local language
to be given - state specific)
Remarks
Date
Good hygiene to clean the affected areas.
Elevating the affected areas.
Care for wounds in the affected areas.
Exercising based on a doctor’s directions.
Signature of MOIC of the Block
Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis (ELF)
Name of Head of Family
Phone number of Patient/Head of Family
Age
Sex
URN (Unique Registration Number) : - - /
- - -/ - - - / - - / - - - / -
Date of Registration
Type of LF Case:* LL, RL, LA, RA, H,
B, O (Please encircle the correct code)
Date of Hydrocelectomy
Name of the Patient
Place of Hydrocelectomy DH/Medical
College/CHC/Camp/Private)
Village
Stage of Lymphedema at time of registration (Stage between 1-7 as per guideline)
- *Patients may have symptoms of more
than one stage. In such situation consider the higher stage (Circle as appropriate
Stage 1, Stage 2, Stage 3, Stage 4, Stage 5,
Stage 6, stage 7
Sub Center
Date of initial MMDP Training for Lymphedema
FU date
FU date
FU Date
FU Date
PHC
Date when MMDP Kit provided - Year - 1
District
Date when MMDP Kit provided - Year - 2
State
Date when MMDP Kit provided - Year - 3
Date when MMDP Kit provided - Year - 4
Date when MMDP Kit provided - Year - 5
*Codes: LL- Left leg, RL- Right Leg, LA- Left Arm, RA-Right Arm, H-Hydrocele, B- Both (L&H), O- Others

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

ELF Register – A. Lymphoedema (Page - 1)
Name of State
Name of District
Name of Block/Planning Unit/Urban PHC/Municipality
URN (Unique
Registration
Number)
Date of
Registration
Name
of the
Patient
Name of
Head of
Family
Phone
number
of Patient/
other family
members
Complete address
of Patient (Ward,
Mohalla/ Subcenter,
Village)
Age of
Patient
Gender of
the Patient
(M/F/O)
Disease Affected Part
Details of ASHA of
patient’s area
Leg
Arm
Breast
Other
Name of
ASHA/
Sahiya/
Health Staff
Phone number
of ASHA /
Sahiya/Health
Staff
R
L
R
L
R
L
ELF Register – A. Lymphoedema (Page – 2 continuation)
Stage of
Lymphedema
at time of
registration*
Duration
of
LF Disease
Year - 1
Year - 2
Year - 3
Year - 4
Year - 5
Status 1. Continuing ; 2. Died
3. Undergone hydrocelectomy
Remarks
Date of
MMDP
training
Date
MMDP
Kit
provided
Date of
MMDP
training
Date
MMDP
Kit
provided
Date of
MMDP
training
Date
MMDP
Kit
provided
Date of
MMDP
training
Date
MMDP
Kit
provided
Date of
MMDP
training
Date
MMDP
Kit
provided
If patient
presented
with any
acute attack,
record the
date of onset
Year

Year

Year

Year

Year

Annexures: 6 (A and B)
A AND B LYMPHOEDEMA AND HYDROCELE
*(Stage between 1-7 as per guideline) - Patients may have symptoms of more than one stage. In such situation consider the higher stage.
LF Register – B. Hydrocele (Page - 1)
Name of State
Name of District
Name of Block/{lanning Unit/ Urban PHC/Municipality:
URN (Unique
Registration
Number)
Date of
Registration
Name
of the
Patient
Name of
Head of
Family
Phone number
of Patient/
Other Family
Members
Complete address
of Patient (Ward,
Mohalla/Subcenter,
village)
Age of
Patient
Gender
of Patient
(M/F/O)
Details of ASHA of patient’s area
Name of ASHA/ Sahiya/
Health Staff
Phone number of ASHA/
Sahiya/Health Staff
LF Register – B. Hydrocele (Page – 2 Continuation )
Communication with the patient
Date of Hydroclectomy
Name of facility where
Hydrocelectomy was done (DH/
CHC/Camp/Private/Medical
college)
Outcome like complete recovery should be recorded on follow up
of patients : complete recovery- 1; Recovery with sequele 2; Death
3; Migration 4;Others 5; *Camps/health facility; Camps A ; Health
facility B
Date of Contact
Willing for
Surgery (Y/N)
If not
contacted,
Reason

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Annexures: 7
MDA PREPAREDNESS CHECKLIST – STATE/DISTRICT/BLOCK OR IU
Format for monitoring of preparedness at State on Mass Drug Administration (MDA)
Date:_______________State: _____________________ Name(s) of the member of team:______________________________________________
Name & designation of the officer interviewed:______________
Sl No
Activities
Status
Remarks
1.
No of Endemic districts/blocks proposed for current round of MDA
2.
Has Implementation units selected for MDA?
Yes
3.
Whether State task force meetings for MDA held/planned? Under the chairmanship of PS/MD
Yes / No
4.
Whether State coordination meeting for MDA held/planned?
Yes / No
5.
Whether funds released from state to districts?
Yes / No
6.
Whether letters issued from MD/ PS-health to District Collectors/DM for MDA?
Yes / No
7.
Whether inter departmental letters for IDA/MDA issued from state?
Yes / No
8.
Status of state level media sensitization workshop
Planned / Completed / Not planned
9.
Whether State ToT for district level /nodal officers held/planned?
Yes / No
No of expected ____, No
10.
Whether SoP/technical guidance disseminated to districts?
Yes / No
11.
Is the state action plan ready?
Yes / No
12.
Is state social mobilization plan ready?
Yes / No
13.
Is there a plan in place for supervision by State officials?
Yes / No
14.
Are night blood survey (microfilaria survey) reports available from all MDA blocks?
Yes / No
15.
Are adequate drugs (Ivermectin/ DEC/ Albendazole) received at State (Including balance stocks of
the past records)
Yes / No
16.
Whether indent placed/instruction issued to districts for procurement of logistics like Indelible
marker pen, chalk/geru and dose pole/measuring tape for IDA?
Yes / No
17.
Whether indent placed/instruction issued to districts for printing of Posters/Banners/Registers/
Formats?
18.
Status of the MSG approved positions?
19.
How many Medical colleges are engaged for MDA campaign
Any other points discussed:

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Format for monitoring of preparedness at District on Mass Drug Administration (MDA)
Date: _____________
State: ____________________
District: ____________________
Date of assessment:__________________
Name of member of team :_____________________________________________ Name of the officer interviewed: ________________________
Designation: _________________________________________
Sl No
Activities
Status
Remarks
1.
Whether and when was the drugs requirement submitted to State programme office?
Yes / No
2.
Whether district task force meetings for IDA/MDA planned/held?
Yes / No
3.
Whether District Task Force meeting chaired by District Magistrate/Collector?
Yes / No
4.
Whether district coordination meeting planned /held?
Yes / No
5.
Were adequate funds received from the state? Mention the date when funds were received
Yes / No
6.
If yes, whether funds released from districts to blocks? Mention the date when funds were transferred
Yes / No / NA
7.
Whether letters have been issued from DC/DM to BDO/PRI/ICDS/Education?
Yes / No
8.
Whether district level ToT for block /nodal officers held/planned?
Yes / No
No expected ___, No
trained ____
9.
Whether district prepared block wise DA training calendar?
Yes/No
10.
Whether training AV aid available with the district VBD officer (DA and IDA videos for drug administrators)
Yes / No
11.
Whether SoP/technical guidance disseminated to blocks?
Yes / No
12.
Whether the district is updating the information/data in Pre MDA preparedness tracker sheet
Yes / No / Not available
13.
Status of district level media sensitization workshop
Planned / Completed /
Not planned
14.
Whether monitoring plan of Pre-IDA/MDA activities available at districts?
Yes / No
15.
Is Night blood survey (microfilaria survey) in all blocks completed as per criteria?
Yes / No
16.
Whether the list of high priority blocks/villages/urban areas available
Yes / No
17.
Whether night blood survey data shared with state?
Yes / No
18.
Are micro plans from all planning units (blocks/urban) received at district level? Days for Booths and H2H
Yes / No
19.
Are Medical colleges engaged in MDA
Yes/No
20.
If yes, whether all micro plans reviewed at district level?
Yes / No / NA
21.
Is there a plan in place for supervision by district officials?
Yes / No
22.
Is district social mobilization/IEC plans ready?
Yes / No
23.
Is rapid response team made at district level?
Yes / No
24.
Are adequate drugs (Ivermectin / DEC /Albendazole) received at district?
Yes / No
25.
Whether indent placed/instruction issued to blocks for procurement of logistics like Indelible marker pen, chalk/geru and dose pole/
measuring tape for IDA?
Yes / No
26.
Whether indent placed/instruction issued to blocks for printing of Posters/Banners/Registers/Formats?
Yes / No
27.
Any other observations and remarks

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Format for monitoring of preparedness at Planning unit (Block/Urban) on Mass Drug Administration (MDA)
State: _____________
District: _____________ Block______________Planning unit: ______________ Assessment date: _____________
Name of the member of team : _________________________________________
Name & Designation of the officer interviewed:

Sl No
Activities
Status
Remarks
1.
Whether dugs requirement submitted to District office?
Yes / No
2.
Whether block/ urban task force meetings for MDA planned/held?
Yes / No
3.
Whether block/ urban coordination meeting planned /held?
Yes / No
4.
Were funds received at CHC/ PHC?
Yes / No
5.
Whether incentive of last round distributed to team members?
Yes / No
6.
Is micro plan available at the block CHC?
Yes / No
7.
Whether social mobilization/IEC plans available?
Yes / No
8.
Whether supervision plan for Pre-MDA activities available?
Yes / No
9.
Whether training of block level officers/ nodal officers completed?
Yes / No
No of expected ____, No
trained_____
10.
Whether training of drug administrators completed?
Yes / No
No of DA____, #
trained_____#batches......
11.
Are training AV aids available (DA/IDA/ Social mobilisation)
Yes / No
12.
Whether sensitization of the BDO, PRI, School teachers, CDPO, Community leaders, etc. completed?
Yes / No
13.
Whether distribution plan for logistics and drugs available?
Yes / No
14.
Is there a plan in place for supervision by block officials during MDA?
Yes / No
15.
Has training of supervisors completed before the round?
Yes / No
No of Supervisor__, No
trained__
16.
Are all villages /wards /mohalla included in micro plan?
Yes / No
17.
Is IEC materials (banners / posters etc.) displayed at CHC/ PHC?
Yes / No
18.
Are adequate drugs (Ivermectin / DEC/ Albendazole) received at block?
Yes / No
19.
Whether logistics like Indelible marker pen/ chalk/ geru / dose pole/ measuring tape for MDA/ IDA etc are available at block?
Yes / No
20.
Is the Family Register for MDA being distributed to Drug Administrator? one per team
Yes / No
21.
Is the line listing of LF patients HSC wise completed before the MDA round?
Yes / No
22.
Total number of LF cases in the block
Hydrocele -
Lymphedema (any limb) -
Lymphedema (Others) -
Any other observations:

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Annexures: 8
CONCURRENT MONITORING AT IMPLEMENTATION UNIT LEVEL
Format for concurrent monitoring of Mass Drug Administration (MDA)
Date: __________District:____________Block:_________________Village/ Urban area: _____________No. of houses in the village/Urban area:_______ Setting: Urban / Rural
Name of Drug Administrators and designation: DA1__________________________Designation: ___________DA2_______________________Designation________________
Supervisor’s name: _____________________________Designation__________________________
Name of monitor (Block letters only): ________________________________________________ Designation: _________________Organization: Others
Time of visit by monitor: _______________ Number of tolas / hamlets/ settlements in this village: _______Number of tolas / hamlets/ settlements monitored: _____________
Sl No
Particulars
Findings
Remarks
1.
Has the team visited the area?
Yes / No
2.
If the team hasn’t visited the area, Reason
(1-Team has not turned up, 2-Last moment micro plan changed, 3-Team not aware, 41 / 2 / 3 / 4
3.
Assessment of M houses by monitor – House number/date of visit by team
4.
Whether team found to be distributing or ensuring consumption of drugs? (D- Distribution, C-
Consumption, B- Both)
D / C / B
D / C / B
D / C / B
5.
Whether finger marking found?
Yes / No / NA
Yes / No / NA
Yes / No / NA
6.
Whether house marking found?
Yes / No
Yes / No
Yes / No
7.
Availability of logistics (please encircle available items)
Indelible marker / Chalk / Family register /Dose pole /
Measuring Tape/ None
8.
Whether daily workplan/micro plan for DA available with team?
Yes / No
9.
Drug Administrators (DA) working as per daily workplan/micro plan?
Yes / No
10.
How many DAs were trained before this round? Please encircle
DA1 / DA2 / Both / None
11.
Are adequate drugs (Ivermectin/ DEC/ Albendazole) available
IVR - Yes / No/ NA, DEC – Yes/No, ALB – Yes/No
12.
No. of person administered drug by DA at time of visit. *
13.
No of person refused to consume drug due to any reason at time of visit *
14.
What IEC/IPC method is used in the area?
ANM / ASHA / MPW / AWW / Vol /Radio / TV /
Newspaper / Hand bills / Others / None
15.
Line list of LF cases has been updated before the MDA round?
Yes / No / Being updated
16.
Whether family register updated simultaneously?
Yes / No
17.
Are the Team members aware about correct dose for IDA/ MDA?
(refer dosage schedule to know the correct dose)
Yes / No / Partial
Note: Monitors should try to meet the Team working in the area and observe their activities; Also visit at least 3 houses of current day (if possible, visit along with team)

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Status of the Endemic District under LF programme
Stage of program
S.No.
Name of
endemic blocks
Population
Total
number of
EUs
Name of the EUs*
MDA (DA/IDA,
Month/ Year of
last round of
MDA)
Pre TAS
(Month/
Year)
TAS1
(Month/Year)
TAS 2
(Month/Year)
TAS 3
(Month/Year)
Block 1
Block 2

Block n
Total=
Annexures: 9
REPORTING FORMATS
Annexure 9.1 Table-1: Update on Lymphatic Filariasis programme Status : Year 20....
(To be compiled and sent by District program officer to respective state and state to share with NCVBDC, Delhi once annually)
Name of the state

Name of the district:

Total Population of District
*Given that an EU needs to be formed at a maximum popn. of 5 lakh, if an EU is being formed by combining 2 or more blocks then kindly indicate it accordingly in the table
Total number of Blocks
Total number endemic blocks
Total number of non-endemic blocks
Total number of unsurveyed blocks

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Annexure 9.2 Table-2 A: Block level Mf survey: Year 20....
Name of the state:__________________________ Name of District:___________________ Name of Block: ___
Date of survey : From (dd/mm/yyyy):_____________ To (dd/mm/yyyy):______________( Till Slide collection or Slide Examination)
Type of site
(a)
Name of the Block/
IU
Name of the PHC
(NHM code )
(b)
Name of the SC/
Urban ward
(NHM code)
(c)
Name of the site
Village/ urban area
(d)
No of persons
examined
by NBS
(e)
No +ve for Mf
(f)
Mf rate (%)
(g)= f/e*100
Sentinel
Random
Pre TAS for DA and IDA
Table-2 B: Block level Pre TAS for DA/ IDA block: Year 20....
Name of the State: __________________________ Name of District: ______________________ Name of Block: ______________
Period of slide collection: From (dd/mm/yyyy): _________________ To (dd/mm/yyyy): ____________
Period of slide examination: From (dd/mm/yyyy): _________________ To (dd/mm/yyyy): __________
Pre -TAS for DA blocks
Type of site
(a)
Name of the Block/
IU
Name of the PHC
(NHM code)
(b)
Name of the SC/
Urban ward
(NHM code)
(c)
Name of the site
Village/ urban area
(d)
No slides
tested by NBS
(e)
No +ve for
mf (>1%)
(f)
Mf rate (%)
(g)= f/e*100
Site 1 (High risk)
Site 2 (High risk)
Site 3 (Random)
Pre-TAS for IDA blocks
Type of site
(a)
Name of the
PHC (NHM
Code)
(b)
Name of the SC/
Urban Ward
(NHM code)
(c)
Name of the
site Village/
urban area
(d)
Test with FTS
No tested by NBS
(All FTS +ve to be
confirmed by NBS)
(h)
No +ve for mf
(>1%) (i)
mf rate (%)
j= (i / (eg)*100))
Total persons
examined with
FTS
(e)
No. +ve
persons with
FTS (Ag>2%)
(f)
No. of
invalid test
(FTS) (g)
Site 1 (High risk)
Site 2 (High risk)
Site 3 (Random)

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Annexure 9.3 : Table-3: Mass Drug Administration (MDA) Coverage in the district: Year 20....
Date (s) of MDA From ________ To:___________ (dd/mm/yy) till end day of Mop up round
Name of the Block
Gender
No. of people administered MDA drug
% administered drugs
(Of Total Popn)
(b/a*100)
Total
Population(a)
>=2 to <5 years
>=5 to <15 years
15-19 years
>19 years
Total (b)
Block 1
Male
Female
Other
Total
Block 2
Male
Female
Other
Total
..
Male
Female
Other
..
Total
Block n
Male
Female
Other
Total

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Administrative level
Designation / category
*No. of staff sanctioned/
Identified
>=2 No of staff in
position to <5 years
No. of staff trained for MMDPservices
Lymphedema care
Hydrocelectomies
State Level

Total
District Level
Total
Block/ CHC Level
Total
PHC Level
Total
Subcentre Level
Total
Grand Total
Total
Annexure 9.4 : Table-4: HR details for the LF programme (Annual Table)
* ‘No. of staff sanctioned’ (in the third colum) should reflect the staff of Health and other sectors required to be trained for ELF.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Annexure 9.5 : Table-5: Health infrastructure available during Year 20.... (Annual Table)
Category of health care
Type of health facility
Total no. of health facilities
No of health facilities providing minimum
package of care
District Level
Medical college/ hospital
District hospital
Others
Block level
Block1 name
Sub district hospital
CHC Level
PHC Level
Subcentre Level
Block2 name
Sub district hospital
CHC Level
PHC Level
Subcentre Level
Block...name
Sub district hospital
CHC Level
PHC Level
Subcentre Level

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Annexure 9.6.: Table-6: Training of Health Staff for ELF during Year 20....
(To be submitted post MDA round)
District ___________ State________________
Date of ToT (dd/mm/yyyy):
No. of persons trained:
Block Name
Total DAs identified
Total DAs
trained
No. of
training
batches
Period of Trainings
Total
supervisors
identified*
Total no of
supervisors
trained
No. of Mos
trained in
MDA
No. of RRT
members
trained in
MDA
From date (DD/MM/
YY)
To date (DD/MM/
YY)
*Supervisors selected includes ANM, LHV, ASHA Sanginis etc

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Annexure 9.7 : Table-7: IEC/BCC Campaign for MDA:
(To be submitted post MDA round) Name of the District
Unit of reporting (Circle applicable one): Block.....1

Planning unit......2
Urban PHC.....3
Name of concernedBlock(s):_____________________________________________________________________________________
IEC/BCC activities
Number required (As per
standard calculations based on
NCVBDC norms)
Number Received/ printed/ activities
conducted
Number distributed
Banners
Hoarding
Handbills
Brochures
Posters
Identification Cards
Date convergence meeting with Key departments (civil
supply, education, SRLM, PRI)
Convergence Meetings at Block level with allied
departments. Please mention
Issuance of directives to support MDA social mobilization
from key departments
Print media activities conducted:
i) Date of Media Briefing
(ii) Print media (newspaper articles)
Electronic media activities conducted ( TV, Radio, video
bytes, cable)
Social Media posts including whatsapp messages
Mid media( Drum beating, miking, skits/ nukkad natak)
Social Mobilization Activiites conducted by:
Schools
PRI
SHGs
No. of rallies/ meetings organized
Any Others social mobilization activities conducted
( Specify)

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Annexure 9.8 : Table-8: Post Consumption Events (Adverse Events):
Year 20....
Name of the District:
Type of Reactions*
No. of persons with Serious Adverse Reactions
Remarks
Name of block
No. of persons with Adverse
Drug Reactions

Total of
Adverse
Reactions
Requiring any Hospitalization
Reason for
hospitilisation
* Adverse events reported: 1-Fever; 2- Bodyache; 3- Vomiting/ Nausea; 4-Headache, 5-Attack of ADL; 6- Others (specify)

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Annexure 9.9 : Table-9: Stock status of Drugs (to be filled after completion of MDA round in the district)
Name of the District/ Urban Health Centre/

Municipality
Block
name
DEC (100 mg)
DEC Tablets
expiring within
next 1 year
Albendazole (400 mg)
Albendazole
tablets
expiring
within 1 year
Ivermectin (3 mg) (only if
IDA)
Ivermectin
tablets
expiring
within 1
year
Opening balance before start of MDA (a)
No. of drugs received for current round (b)
No. of drugs used during MDA round (c)
No. of drugs damaged during MDA round (d)
Total balance remaining after MDA round =
a + b –(c+d+e) (opening balance for the next
round)
Date of Expiry
No of tablets expiring
Opening balance before start of MDA (a)
No. of drugs received for current round (b)
No. of drugs used during MDA round (c)
No. of drugs damaged during MDA round (d)
No. of drugs used in regular OPD etc (e)
Total balance remaining after MDA round =
a + b –(c+d+e) ( opening balance for the next
round)
Date of Expiry
No of tablets expiring
Opening balance before start of MDA (a)
No. of drugs received for current round (b)
No. of drugs used during MDA round (c)
No. of drugs damaged during MDA round (d)
No. of drugs used in regular OPD etc (e)
Total balance remaining after MDA round =
a + b –(c+d+e) (opening balance for the next
round)
No. of tablets expiring
Batch no.

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Annexure 9.10: Table - 10: Line Listing of Filaria Patients
Name of the District
Name of the PHC/CHC
Registration
no. (AA-BBBCCC-##-
###-H)
Name
of the
Patient
Name of
Head of
Family
Phone
number
of Patient/
Head of
Family
Address
of
Patient
(Village
name)
Name of
the sub
Centre
Age of
Patient
Sex of
Patient
Disease
Affected
Part (Put
relevant
code) *
Date of
Examination
by Medical
Officer (dd/
mm/yy)
Stage**
Present status of case
1. Continuing
2. Died
3. Undergone hydrocelectomy
Year

Year

Year

Year

Year

Total LF patients line listed:________ Total Lymphedema patients:_____________ Total Hydrocele patients:_________
*Codes: LL- Left leg, RL- Right Leg, LA- Left Arm, RA-Right Arm, H-Hydrocele, L- Left Breast, RB- Right Breast, B- Both (L&H), O-Other
**Stage as assessed by MO in districts/ states where there is a financial implication at present or in future

Stage 1 : Lymphoedema reversible overnight

Stage 2 : Irreversible lymphoedema with normal skin

Stage 3 : Irreversible lymphoedema with thickened skin and shallow folds whose base is visible
Stage 4 : Irreversible lymphoedema with knobs (bumps and lump)

Stage 5 : Irreversible lymphoedema with deep folds whose base is visible when separated by finger

Stage 6 : Irreversible lymphoedema with mossy foot

Stage 7 : With irreversible lymphoedema, disability to do routine activities adequately. Patient incapacitated

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

S.No.
Name of block
Mobile no
of MOIC/
Nodal
person at
Block PHC
All Lymphedema cases
All Hydrocele cases
Number
of cases
presented
with ADL
No of cases
treated for
ADL
No of cases
trained on
MMDP
No. of
cases given
MMDP kits
No followed
up
Total no. of
Hydrocele
cases
Number of
hydrocelectomies done
in the month
No.
ineligible
for surgery
Annexure 9.11 Table - 11: Monthly MMDP report
Name of District: ___________________________________

Month : ________________________
**Stage as assessed by MO:
- Stage 1 : Lymphoedema reversible overnight;
- Stage 2 : Irreversible lymphoedema with normal skin;
- Stage 3 : Irreversible lymphoedema with thickened skin and shallow folds whose base is visible
- Stage 4 : Irreversible lymphoedema with knobs (bumps and lump);
- Stage 5 : Irreversible lymphoedema with deep folds whose base is visible when separated by finger
- Stage 6 : Irreversible lymphoedema with mossy foot;

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Annexure 9.12 Table- 12: Details of DCC and BCC Meetings in year ------
(To be submitted post MDA round)
1. Details of DCC meetings
Name of the district:_______________________
Details of DCC meetings
First DCC Meeting (60 days
before MDA)
Second DCC Meeting (15 Days
before MDA)
Third DCC meeting (25 days
after MDA)
Date
Duration of discussion on ELF
and MDA
Person who chaired (DM, CDO,
ED Zila Parishad, Other)
Total no of participants
Participation of representatives
from key departments: (Please
circle all as per the presence)
Health, Education, ICDS,
Urban planning, NUHM, PRI,
SHG,Social Development, NGOs,
professional bodies
Health, Education, ICDS,
Urban planning, NUHM, PRI,
SHG,Social Development, NGOs,
professional bodies
Health, Education, ICDS,
Urban planning, NUHM,
PRI, SHG,Social Development,
NGOs , professional bodies
CMO- Y/N
ACMO-VBD-Y/N
DMO/DVBDCO-Y/N
PRI- Y/N
ICDS-Y/N
Primary Education-YN
Urban development /MuniciplityY/N; Medical College - Y/N/NA
Whether minutes of meeting are
available? Y/N (if yes, share)
Key directives issued for MDA
execution
Follow up from previous DCC
meeting on key decisons
(as relevant)

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

2. Details of BCC meetings (Continuation of 6.12)
Block name
Block name
Block name
Block name
No of meetings (Dates seperated
by comma)
Key participant’s
names and
designations
Whether
minutes of
meeting are
available? Y/N
(if available,
please attach)
Key issues
discussed:
Date and
Duration of
discussion on
ELF and MDA
Person who
chaired (SDM,
BDO, MOIC,
Other)
Participation of
representatives
from key
departments:
(Please mention)
Whether
minutes of
meeting are
available? Y/N
Key directives
issued for MDA
execution
No. of meetings
held
-
Add columns to add more number of blocks

Revised Guideline on Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis

Designed and Printing by: www.3psolutionsindia.com